Bro! Tell me we still know how to speak of kings! In the old days,
everyone knew what men were: brave, bold, glory-bound. Only
stories now, but I'll sound the Spear-Danes' song, hoarded for hungry times.

Their first father was a foundling: Scyld Scefing.
He spent his youth fists up, browbeating every barstool-brother,
bonfiring his enemies. That man began in the waves, a baby in a basket,
but he bootstrapped his way into a kingdom, trading loneliness
for luxury. Whether they thought kneeling necessary or no,
everyone from head to tail of the whale-road bent down:
There's a king, there's his crown!
That was a good king.

Later, God sent Scyld a son, a wolf cub,
further proof of manhood. Being God, He kne
how the Spear-Danes had suffered, the misery
they'd mangled through, leaderless, long years of loss,
so the Life-lord, that Almighty Big Boss, birthed them
Earth-shaker. Beow's name kissed legions of lips
by the time he was half-grown, but his own father
was still breathing. We all know a boy can't daddy
until his daddy's dead. A smart son gives
gifts to his father's friends in peacetime. 
When war woos him, as war will,
he'll need those troops to follow the leader,
Privilege is the way men prime power,
the world over. 

Scyld was iron until the end. When he died, 
his warriors executed his final orders.
They swaddled their king of rings and did just
as the Dane had demanded, back when mind
and meter could merge in his mouth. 
They bore him to the harbor, and into the bosom 
of a ship, that father they'd followed, that man
they'd adored. She was anchored and eager
to embark, an ice maiden built to bear
The weight of a prince. They laid him
by the mast, packed tight in his treasure-trove,
his bright swords, war-weeds, his lap holding a hoard
of flood-tithes, each fare-coin placed by a loyal man.
He who pays the piper calls the tune.
His shroud shone, ringed in runes, sun-stitched.
I've never heard of any ship so heavy, nor corpse 
so rich. Scyld came into the world unfavored;
his men weighted him as well as the strangers had,
who'd once warped him to the waves' weft.
Even ghosts must be fitted to fight.
The war-band flew a golden flag over their main man;
the salt sea saluted him, so too the storms,
and Scyld's soldiers got drunk instead of crying.
They mourned the way men do. No man knows,
not me, not you, who hauled Scyld's hoard to shore,
but the poor are plentiful, and somebody got lucky.
 
Finally, Beow rolled into righteous rule,
daddying for decades after his own daddy died.
At last, though, it was his turn for erasure:
his son, the Halfdane, ran roughshod, smothering
his father's story with his own. He rose in the realm
and became a famous warlord, fighting ferociously
the dawn to dusk, fathering his own horde of four, 
heirs marching into the world in this order: Heorogar,
Hrothgar, Halga, and I heard he hand-clasped his daughter
(her name's a blur) to Onela. Tender, she rendered that battle-Swede 
happy in fucking, where before he'd only been happy in fighting. 

War was the wife Hrothgar wed first. Battles won
treasures taken. Admirers and kin heard of his fight-fortune,
and flanked him in force. Strong boys grow into stronger men,
and when Hrothgar had an army, his hopes turned to a hall 
to home them-a house to espouse his faithful.
More than just a mead-hall, a world's wonder,
eighth of seven. When it was done, he swore,
he'd load-lighten, unhand everything he'd won,
Worn, and owned, pass to his posse all God's gifts,
save lives and land. He'd keep the kingdom, of course.
He gave far-reaching orders: carpets, carpentry, walls and gables,
tables for seating a clan, rare gifts plated like rare meat,
all for his men. So it rose: a greater hall than any other!
Hrothgar filled it, blood-brother by blood-brother,
and named it Heorot. His words were heard and heralded,
and yes, yes, bro! The man was more than just talk:
he gave good gifts. His war-wedded wore kings' rings,
and drank their leader's mead. Nightly, he feted his fight-family
with fortunes. The hall loomed, golden towers antler-tipped;
it was asking for burning, but that hadn't happened yet.
You know how it is: every castle wants invading, and every family
has enemies born within it. Old grudges recrudesce.

Speaking of grudges: Out there in the dark, one waited
He listened, holding himself hard to home,
but he'd been lonely too long, brotherless,
sludge-stranded. Now he heard and endured
the din of drinkers. Their poetry poisoned his peace.
Every night, turmoil: raucous laughter from Heorot,
howling of harps, squawking of scops.
Men recounting the history of men like them.
The Almighty made Earth for us, they sang.
Sun and moon for our (de)light,
fens full of creatures for our feasting,
meres to quench our thirst.
Heorot's hall-dwellers caroused by candlelight,
stumbling to sleep with the sunrise, replete,
lambs bleating comfort, ease-pleased,
until the night wakefulness moved their watcher to wrath.

Grendel was the name of this woe-walker,
Unlucky, fucked by Fate. He'd been
living rough for years, ruling the wild:
the mere, the fen, and the fastness,
his kingdom. His creation was cursed
under the line of Cain, the kin-killer.
The Lord, long ago, had taken Abel's side.
Though none of that was Grendel's doing,
he'd descended from bloodstains.
From Cain had come a cruel kind,
seen by some as shadow-stalked: monsters,
elves, giants who'd ground against God,
and for that, been banished.

Under a new moon, Grendel set out
to see what horde haunted this hall.
He found the Ring-Danes drunk,
douse-downed, making beds of benches.
They were mead-medicated, untroubled
by pain, their sleep untainted by sorrow.
Grendel hurt, and so he hunted. This stranger 
taught the Danes about time. He struck, seized
thirty dreaming men, and hied himself home,
bludgeoning his burden as he bounded, for the Danes
had slept sweetly in a world that had woken him,
benefited from bounty, even as they'd broken him.
 
When golden teeth tasted the sky,
Grendel's silent skill was seen. His kills-
grim crimson spilt on banquet-boards.
The war-horde wailed at the spoiling of their sleep,
at the depths they'd dived in darkness, while their enemy ate.
A mournful morning, Their leader sat at his plate, old overnight,
impotent at this ingress. The band tracked the invader, but not to his lair.
They had prayers to call out, and pains to bear.
Grendel did not stay himself from slaughter. The next night
a second slaying, and then another, his rope played out and
rotted through, a cursed course plotted without mercy,
and corse after corse cold in his keep. Bro, it was easy
after that to count the weepers: men fleeing to cotes
beneath the king's wings. You'd have to have been a fool to miss
malice of the Hell-dweller, now hall-dwelling. Those who lived, left
or locked themselves in ladies' lodgings, far from fault lines.
Those who stayed? Slain.

For twelve snow-seasons, Grendel reigned over evening.
Hrothgar suffered, Heorot buffeted, no hero to hold it.
Every outsider talked shit, telling of legends and losses.
Hrothgar's hall became a morgue, dark marks on the floorboards.
No songs, no scops, no searing meat, no blazing fire.
And Grendel, incomplete, raided relentlessly.
Dude, this was what they call a blood feud, a war
that tore a hole through the hearts of the Danes.
Grendel was broken, and would not brook peace
desist in dealing deaths, or die himself.

He had no use for stealth - he came near-nightly,
And never negotiated. The old counselors knew better
than to expect a settlement in silver from him.
Ringless, Grendel's fingers, kingless,
his country. Be it wizened vizier or beardless boy,
he hunted them across foggy moors, an owl
mist-diving for mice, grist-grinding their tails
in his teeth. A hellion's home is anywhere
good men fear to tread; who knows the dread this
marauder mapped?

Grendel, enemy to everyone, waged his war
without an army, lonesome as he lapped 
the luxurious lengths of Heorot. He howl-haunted
the hall at night, the gold-gifter's throne throwing
shade at him, his soul burning with dark flame.
He couldn't touch the treasure, or tame
his yearning, for he'd been spurned by God.

Times were hard for the prince of the Scyldings, too,
heart-shattered, battered spirit spent
Men came to advise, bringing pithy plots
and plans to arrest Hrothgar's awful guest.
They bent themselves to idols, and offered up
their own spells, that a soul-slayer might suddenly
show up and save them. That was their nature,
these heathens, hoping at the wrong heavens,
remembering Hell, but nothing else.
They knew no true Lord, no God, no Master.
They, too, were cursed, yet thought themselves clear
Bro, lemme say how fucked they were
in times of worst woe throwing themselves
on luck rather than on faith, fire-walkers
swearing their feet uncharred, while
smoke-stepping. Why not face
the Boss, and at death seek
salves, not scars?

So it went for years, the Hell-sent raider harrowing
the Halfdane's son, who sat in silence, brooding
over unhatched hopes, while in the dark his
people shuddered, salt-scourged by weeping
by nights spent waking instead of sleeping.

News went global. In Geatland, Hygelac's right-hand man
heard about Grendel. Bro, here was a warrior
like no other: massive, mighty, born of noble
blood. He called for a ship to be readied
for his band, and boasted he'd try his teeth on this tale,
sail in as a savior over the swan-road, seek that king
and lend a hand as defender. His elders
understood his quest, and though he was dear to them,
they knew better than to spear him with speeches.
They augured the omens - ooh! - and ushered him onward.
He found fourteen fists for hire, the boldest men
of the Geats, and enlisted them as fighters.
He, as their captain, went aboard to pilot
the vessel, with sea-skill, through
keen currents and mean depths. 
Soon it was time to depart:
the boat's belly was wet,
and beneath the land-locks
these warriors met, cheering,
bringing battle-gear into her bosom.
And as sand spit and surf sang, they pushed off 
and sent themselves to sea, made men.
The wind sent them surging.
With a foam-feathered throat,
their bird flew free, sailing with certainty
over salt waters. On the second day,
she sought a shore, and the men saw cliffs,
crags uplifting from the ocean:
the end of the voyage. Overboard 
the Geats leapt, shifting from sailors to soldiers,
the moment their soles touched solid earth.
Their weapons rattled as they moored the boat,
their mail unveiled in sunlight. 
They thanked God for easy passage
ward. and sweet seas.

Far above them, the Scylding's watchman
waited. It was his duty to keep
these cliffs unclimbed. When his gaze hit
gleam: swords and shields glittering
cross the gangplank, passing without permission,
Hrothgar's man set out for the sand on horseback,
straight spear in hand, to stand
formally and question them:
"How dare you come to Denmark
costumed for war? Chain mail and swords?!
There's a dress code! You're denied.
I'm the Danes' doorman; this is my lord's door.
Who are you that you dare steer your ship
for our shore? I'm the watcher of these waters,
have been for years, and it's my duty to scan the sea
for shield-bearing dangers to Danes. I've never seen
any force come so confidently over swells, certain of welcome,
no welcome won. Did you send word? No! Were you invited?
No! You're not on the guest list. And, also, who's the giant?
What weapons does he hold? Oh, hell no.
He's no small-time hall-soldier, but noble!
Look at his armor! I'm done here!
Spies, state your secrets, or be denounced,
Who are you, what's your business,
where'd you come from?
I'll ask one more time. 
You're not coming past this cliff.
Answer now, or bounce.
You, men: Who? Where? Why?
Their leader unlocked his word-hoard. 
He was the senior soldier, so he spat certainty:
"We are Geats, born and bred, bound
to Hygelac. My father was Ecgtheow.
No doubt you've heard of him. He was famous. 
He lived through winters that would've
pressed the life from a lesser, and though
he's long since left us, everyone, the world over,
knows my daddy's name. We come in peace,
looking for your lord and land-shield,
the son of the Halfdane. Kindly give us
directions and we'll get gone.
Were here to offer ourselves up
to the Dane's lord, and our plans
are open, no secrets from you.
Is it true that something savage
walks at night? We've heard the stories,
that misery stalks and rages here,
that good men are endangered here,
by a stranger in this country.
We come to counsel your king
on how to cleave his reaver,
and court calm. If there's respite
to be had, I'm the lad to bring it.
Otherwise, Hrothgar will be grieving
and desperate as long as his
hall hangs - I see it there -
at the horizon."


The watchman was unmoved, his authority innate.
He sat tall on horseback. "I know
the difference between words and deeds,
as anyone with half a brain does.
Thus far, I'll endorse your scheme:
you seem a troop true to my lord.
The rest is in the proving.
Come, then, bring your battle-gear.
I'll lead you to my leader,
and send my guards to circle
your new-tarred ship on the sandbar,
until it's time for her to rise ring-prowed
Over this rolling road and be boarded again
by whichever of you -- if any? - 
survive the sword-storm you've sought."
Off they went, agreed, leaving
their own mount, that wide wave-rover,
hitched to rope and anchor.
Boars bristled from their cheek-shields,
gold forced into fierce forms by fire.
The watchman led them toward their war. 
Fifteen men heeded him and marched
with speed, until the timbered hall
was before them, shimmering, golden, 
the structure best known under the sun and stars
to every citizen of Earth.
This was a place real men could be rebirthed, 
and their guide pointed the path to it,
then turned tail, saying:
"I've been away from my sea-view too long.
May the Father leave you living. 
For me, I return to my ocean-post,
to scan the shore for
Other enemies."

The road was stone-cobbled, and kept them
coming correct, a straight line of marchers,
war-garb gleaming, chains linked by hardened hands,
their armor ringing. loud as any hall-bell. By the time
they arrived in Heorot, dressed for demons,
they were sagging, sea-stung. They stacked shields,
wood-weathered, against the walls, then sat down
on benches, their metal making music. Their spears,
they stood like sleeping soldiers, tall but tilting,
gray ash, a death-grove. Each maker of armor-din
was twinned to his weapon. A man of Hrothgar's
company, admiring them, inquired:
"What kingdom sent you here, boys, with your crests
and shields, your gilt helmets and gray-clothed
chests, your sharpened spears? I'm Hrothgar's
herald and officer, and in all my years
I've never seen such an impressive
assembly of outlanders. You've too much style
to be exiles, so I expect you must be
heroes, sent to Hrothgar?"

The man - we know him, his name means nerve - 
the leader of the Geats, hard-core in his helmet,
spoke their mission succinctly:  "We're Hygelac's reserve, trained
and ready. Beowulf's my name.
If the Halfdane's son, your leader and lord,
will allow me to come to him,
I'll explain my errand in a few words."

Wulfgar, a Wendel warrior, renowned and warranted
for wisdom and for the tempered edge of his nature
replied: "I'l ferry your request to our king
and ring-giver, Lord of the Scyldings,
and see what, if anything, he offers
in response. I'll return with his answer
as quickly as he
gives it me."

He went with haste to Hrothgar's throne.
The old man was gray, huddled in pain
with his retainers. Bold Wulfgar
stood submissive at his shoulder - he knew the score.
He whispered the matter to his lord:
Geatlanders have come ashore, sea-sullied
from their long sail. Their captain and compeller
is called Beowulf, and he petitions for words
with you. Hrothgar, most generous,
don't deny them. They're well-dressed,
thus well-born, and thus worthy.
And the man who led them here -
he looks so right! His chest, broad in girth,
his armor blazing, bright!
Blatantly of noble birth."

Hrothgar, the Scyldings' helm, lifted his head:
"Beowulf? I knew him when he was a boy, and 
I knew his daddy, too, Ecgtheow, with whom
Hrethel the Geat bedded his daughter down.
Their son and heir is here to bring health to me!
A crew of mine once crossed to Geatland
with gifts from me to his father, and they
brought back a cargo of stories.
Ecgtheow's boy, they said, had a handgrip
as strong as that of thirty men! As for his band
of Geats - hurry, let them in! Holy!
How good is God?! A hero's been sent here
by Heaven to defend the Danes from Grendel!
At least, that's what I hope he's come to do.
If he relieves the pressure on our Paradise,
I'll pay him in gold! Go back before he comes
to his senses and runs. Bid him appear
before his father's friend: he's more than welcome
here in Denmark!"

Wulfgar returned to the Geats, stood at the door,
and said: "My king, the East-Danes leader-in-arms,
tells me he knows your father, and that
you seafarers are welcomed into Heorot. He hails
you, as he would homecoming soldiers. Go, dressed
in your war-gear, your helms, your masks,
and present yourselves to Hrothgar.
No shields necessary, nor spears, boys,
leave your slaughter-slingers here."
Beowulf arose, and around him rose his armored army,
though some stayed to guard the war-hoard, by request.
They hastened behind their leader through Heorot's radiance
Their battle-bringer stood before the fire, glowing,
and considered his words, his chain mail the myth-protecting
work of a smith, links netted to one another
for war-glory. His helmet made him look harder,
so he spoke from beneath it:
"My respects to Hrothgar. I'm a kinsman of Hygelac, 
and over the years, no boasts --
I've been known for my promise and prowess.
I heard tell of Grendel from sailors -- seriously,
the whole world knows the stories, swapped and sworn,
of Heorot Hall's early curfew, how every night
you surrender to silence when the sun sprints
out of Heaven, leaving the celestial dome dark.
Every elder knew I was the man for you, and blessed
my quest, King Hrothgar, because where I'm from?
I'm the strongest and the boldest, and the bravest and the best.
Yes: I mean -- I may have bathed in the blood of beasts,
netted five foul ogres at once, smashed my way into a troll den
and come out swinging, gone skinny-dipping in a sleeping sea
and made sashimi of some sea monsters.
Anyone who fucks with the Geats? Bro, they have to fuck with me.
They're asking for it, and I deal them death.
Now, I want to test my mettle on Grendel, best him,
a match from man into meat. Just us two,
hand to hand. Sweet. Let me ask one thing, though,
King of the Bright-Danes, Friend of Men, Dire-Defender
Against the Dark, He Who Knows What It Means to Fight
trust me on this. Don't refuse my humble request. 
We came a long way, me and my men, to conquer
your curse and cleanse Heorot. This task should be ours 
and ours alone, as discussed. I'm told your pest mocks
metal? In that case, I'll make my man 
Hygelac proud, his fame fiercer.
Your boy will enshroud his blade, and
fight with fingers and nails.
No sword, no shield, no safety net,
nothing but my grip, a hand-clasped battle 
to the death. When we see who wins,
we'll know who's got God's favor.
If it's Grendel -- I'll be a mere chapter
in his gory story. He'l feast on Geats,
ripping my men limb from limb,
and I won't be there to protect them.
I'll be dead, too, cheekbones chewed
and face forgotten, my body dragged
to his lair, where he'll fare alone on my
severed head, make a banquet of my flesh,
he and I, alone again, naturally. Don't cry 
for this broken boy, don't lay out what's left of me.
If warfare revokes my pass to Earth's kingdom,
just send this mail-shirt made by Weland -- 
willed to me by my grandfather Hrethel -- to Hygelac.
Horrors happen, I'm grown, I know it.
Bro, Fate can fuck you up."
Hrothgar, the Scyldings' own skull-protector, 
had some things to say: "Beowulf, I count you 
a favored fight-friend now. Your father? 
I knew him from a feud, which he began,
by killing Heatholaf, that, too, hand to hand --
and Heatholaf was a Wulfing, so that shit
couldn't stand. Your father's country
wouldn't keep him -- they threw him out -- 
and he set sail over sea to me. I was
A young king of the Danes then, hauling up a hoard
of treasure, that ladder's rungs burnt
beneath me. My brother Heorogar had died.
and he was the firstborn, the better
I was the lesser brother, but it didn't matter. I fixed
your father's feud with fistfuls of old gold, my treasure
shipped to stop his country's wound. Ecgtheow
owed me allegiance ever after.
Oh, it hurts my head that the world knows
of my grief, of Heorot's heartbreaker. Is there
laughter in far-off places, at me, and at my men?
I'm humiliated my hall-force has bent to Grendel's
greed, and I'm short of saviors, bleeding the brave,
feeding them to Fate. God giving ground not to heroes,
but to this twelve-winter shit-season!
And yet, over and over, when golden mead
was pouring, warriors swore their safety
was nothing compared to Heorot's.
They'd sleep with swords, with certainty,
but when the sun rose ... slaughter. Benches
bloody, no sign of those brave soldiers, the floor a pool,
where once it was a playground for poets. It's all
written in red. Know before you dine, Beowulf:
your predecessors are deceased. But sit down, my new old friend.
Boy, enjoy the feast. Take your place in the tale. 
my heroes and their hopes."

A banquet-bench was brought, an empty one,
so every Geat could sit beside his brothers,
and there they dined, in splendor. At their shoulders
stood a server, and he held a jeweled ewer
flled with mead, sweet for singing and for feasting.
A scop sang, too, his voice surging like a swallow 
into the verging arches of Heorot, cheering for this party
of Danes and Geats, all bold men met to bet on Beowulf.

Near Hrothgar's feet squatted Unferth, Ecglaf's son,
unconvinced, whispering churlish words.  Beowulf's bravado 
bristled him, and envy ate him alive. He'd historically been glorious,
and the notion that another, more notorious under Heaven,
might enjoy greater greatness, made him gnash.

"Bro, do you happen to be the Beowulf 
who challenged Breca in the open ocean,
insisting you should swim in shark-seas
for no reason but to prove your petty prowess
Boasting that no boat should guard your lives,
but that you should risk them recklessly?

I heard no one could convince you two of clarity,
That you dove overboad surfing on stupidity,
swearing you knew the currents better than any other,
and that you, swole as a troll fed on travelers,
were superior to any swell.
You lolled for seven nights in wintry waters
and in the end? He outswam your fool self,
skipped to shore unscathed though uncertain.
and rolled onto the sand safely, in the land
of the Heotho-Reams. From there, he went
to his home country, where the Brandings
adored him, a calm and pleasant place,
and returned to his hall, his host.
His boyish boast was proven, yes, he'd
bested Beowulf. No matter your other battles,
the tales you told, the lines you sold,
buddy, at least you lived. This time?
Bro, know it: no one's ever lasted
a night clasped in Grendel's arms."

Beowulf, Ecgtheow's son, wasn't fazed:
"Well actually, buddy, sit down, you're drunk.
Unferth, you've run your mouth about Breca, me,
and our sea-swagger, but let me drop some truth
into your tangent. I've been better on the water,
deeper in the drink, and stronger in the swim,
than any man alive. Breca and I were boys
together. Our desires were only dares, one upon
the other, brother to brother, maybe you know this story?
But hold up: I forgot, you've got no brothers left.
We declared ourselves adventurers, and so we swam,
Swords in hands for safety, unsheathed, father-forged.
We knew there were sharks. No one here is stupid.
He couldn't float freer or swim straighter than I,
and I had no urge to leave him or lose the lesser
swimmer. I was Breca's lifeguard. I knew my duty.
The rains rocked us, and storms shook us, and for five nights
we floated, warring against winds from the north,
the waves like blades, bone-cold, until at last,
we were blown apart, the biting beasts of the bottom
roiling up to wring me, wrestling me to the seafloor.
All that held me was my armor, clasped hands
made of gold, chain mail gainsaying waves and wet,
the work of ancestors forging my ferocity.
It kept me bold enough to fight when a monster 
dragged me down and gripped me, ripping at my skin.
I was pinned, swaddled in squalor. Last chance, I took it- 
I put that monster down, I made it a sleeper as it leapt,
severed its spine, spiked its skull, and split it into smithereens.
My own strength sank that sea monster, and
soon I was fighting again, lower than any human's sight,
Outside even the edges of God's light. Dark deeps, Hell's creatures
in them, swinging my sword beneath the eyes of the world,
I would not be eaten, nor beaten, no skewered swimmer I,
no drowned dinner for a circle of cold companions,
gobbling my guts, glutted on my gold.
At dawn, I surfaced in a slurry of scales,
Floating flotsam where formerly there'd been fangs.
I'd sacrificed myself to save every subsequent seafarer
from deep despair, and the monsters
of the dark were gone. The east was gilded
with God, and the sea was smooth.
I could see the shore, the strong cliffs rising,
built of their own bruises. If a man's brave enough,
Fate, when on the fence, will often spare him.
I'd never brag, but the truth is, my sword slew
nine singular scavengers that night. There are
no oceangoing stories more awful
than mine, no tales of greater terror,
no other man so sea-stalked, but I survived,
my salvation in my own hands. The waves
bore me shoreward, attending me, and left me
at long last in the land of the Finns. The End.
I've racked my brain, bro, but, Unferth,
I can't unpack any similar stories of
heroics from you. Let me say it straight:
You don't rate and neither did Breca
when it came to battle. The gulf? You're cattle,
and I'm a wolf. I'm not even mentioning your sins.
your kin-killing. your brother-beating: 
No shit, though, Unferth, if you were
the bitter-brawling brave you claim to be,
your king wouldn't have suffered a single night
of Grendel's rampage, no bitten bones,
no hall-horror, no chaos in his kingdom.
Grendel was aware he had nothing to fear here.
Your sword's soft, son. No warrior
awaited him in Heorot. The Scyldings
were unshielded, their hall unguarded. He knew
he could crush you, comfort himself with grappling, 
grind your bones to make his bread. He's got no fear 
of beer-hall brothers, but, this you can quote -- he'll fear me.
There're no guns of note on anyone but me and my Geats. 
Come on, Ecglaf's son. Beat me. Or better yet, make me a bet 
that Grendel's maker won't be met. Then, if you brave boys 
feel like drinking, I'll serve you ale for breakfast, the sun shining
on silver and gold, daylight yours, after night's been mine.
This speech was more than enough to convince the ring-giver,
his hair gray, his war-grace blazing. The king
of the Bright-Danes knew now he could defend his people
with an assist from this warrior of the wider world.
He got the party started, loud and lordly,
And the hall welled up and overran with laughter.

Wealhtheow appeared among them then, Hrothgar's queen.
Gleaming, her gown golden, she chose she chose her chance to charm.
She was the cup-keeper. She raised it high to show the men,
then bore it to Hrothgar, Dane's delight,
her husband and home-holder. She held it to his lips
and he drank deeply, the love of country in each draft.
He threw it back as fast as once he'd drawn his sword,
this old, old lord of war, and his men cheered. She went round,
a Helming-hostess, treading with purpose, rings shining,
beer-sounding soldiers, old and young, both of her own house
and the sea-slayers, goblet held to her breast. Hashtag: blessed.
At last, Beowulf was before her, fingers outstretched.
She welcomed him carefully to Heorot as a hero,
a man who'd answer hopes with hands, and who might,
please God, finally redeem her land from Hell.

The warrior took the cup from Wealhtheow, eager 
for the end of festivities, for the night and fight to come. 
He was ready for his war, and a wight awaited him. 
Beowulf sipped, and the son of Ecgtheow assured the queen: 
"Woman, knew my plan when I set off for this coast.
Before I put my band in that boat, already I was bent 
on victory. I mean to give you a show, to make
your sleep safe or be slain myself, Grendel's spikes
in my skin. I'm gonna do as real men do,
and render myself a reaper, bleed him dry,
or let Death tend me and cup-bear in your place,
here in this mead-hall."

The hostess was impressed by Beowulf's boasts.
Brass balls, if nothing else. She posted up
beside Hrothgar, queenly, her gold glinting.

There was more celebration, the kind of party
that hadn't been heard of in a while
rowdy and riotous, loud with laughter
and proud poetry, until the Halfdane's heir
arrested rhyme for rest. The fiend, he knew,
had been silent, subterranean while the sun shone,
but now it was night. Darkness draped the Earth.
The happy hall would soon be a demon's domain,
the men his dreadful diet. Shadows slunk from the swamp,
and mists mossed the cliffs and hillsides. The men stood
witness as their leaders took leave.
Hrothgar wished luck on the late-lingerer, 
gave him all hall-power, and proclaimed: 
"I've never, not in all my years of shield-bearing,
trusted any other could hold this hall from horrors.
It's yours tonight. May you ward it well:
it was built for the tenders of the flame. Keep
your reputation in mind, and stand unyielding
against the brute. IfI find you alive in the morning,
I'll reward you beyond your wildest dreams.

Hrothgar and his household left the hall,
the leader and protector of the Scyldings
bound to Wealhtheow's bed for comforts --
his wifely strife-soother. The king, it would
prove, had appointed a watcher whose muscles
were monster-matched, Fate-directed
to the Dane-chief as a prince-protector.
The Geats knew all this already. They trusted
their man, his iron arms and brawling brand.
Beowulf stripped, removed his breastplate and helmet,
handed off his fine-forged heirloom sword
his servant swooned over that sweet smith's steel,
ordered in no uncertain terms to ward and keep it safe.

Beowulf headed to bed, swollen with certainty.
and swore, this mortal gift from God:
"I don't know what you've heard about hand to hand,
but my hands are better than good, man. I'm direr
than any demon. I won't slice Grendel with a sword, boys -- 
too simple -- I'd end him too quickly; it'd be unfair.
He has no skill, only reptilian skin. His mind's
got no flair for strategy, though his strength
is savant. Nope, I'll go unarmed into this evening,
and he'll take it on the chin -- if he's got guts
enough not to flee. May God referee
this ring, and declare the winner whichever
of us he wishes."

Then Beowulf dropped his head to pillow,
and beside him rested his command of brave men,
warriors of sea and sleep. They were ready
to see life's end, and didn't expect to lay eyes
on their heartland again, not familiar soil,
not their parents, not their wives. They knew
the story of the slaughterer, the dozen years Danes
had been driven from their home-hall. The Almighty, though,
had other plans, a tapestry of terror threaded with triumph,
the Weather-Geats the victors. They'd rise with their leader,
crush the challenger, and cruise through creation
kinsmen to a king. You know how it goes:
God's the final decider, and men only the
question-askers, students seeking solace.
In the dead of night, Grendel emerged,
a predator without need of torch,
serged to the shadows. Nearly all the guards
were sleep-sagging, chins to chests. They'd stitched
themselves to God, and knew no enemy could hem
them in, not without Almighty approval.
Just one thane waited, feigning sleep
as the hour grew late. He lay awake, on high alert.

Hidden by fog, Grendel roved the moors, God-cursed,
grudge worsening. He knew who he hunted:
wine-drunk, mead-met men, and he pined
for his prey. Under storm clouds, he stalked them,
in his usual anguish, feeling a forbidden hearth,
that gilded hall atop the hill, gleaming still,
through years of bloodshed. This was not
the first time he'd hunted in Hrothgar's hall,
but never before nor later had he such hard luck.
No one worthy had historically lain in wait.
The warrior worked his way toward the war,
his head and heart hurting, and arrived
at the iron-crossed door. Its hinges howled a welcome,
and his rage ratcheted up. He flung the hatch
wide and leapt into the mead-room, over
decorated floors in the hold, fury frothing.
His heart crowed as he counted them, man by man,
nested together, roosting like roasting chickens.
He'd be the sort of fox that stalks the night.
Eat his fill, no coo remaining, no bill-only feathers,
loose on the floor. Before sunrise, he planned to prise souls
from skeletons. His wyrd, though, would no longer be writ
in others' blood, red footprints to the door and out,
the moors, the mere. No. Tonight was the night
Grendel's goose would be cooked, his funeral
banquet bruised and blue.

Fervid and flexing, faking sleep,
Hygelac's servant spied from his bench,
scanning slit-eyed the long-haunted hall, awaiting 
the hunted hunter. At last his enemy struck,
snatching a sleeper, sucking him bone-dry,
staining the pale planks red, grunting, gobbling 
gnawing him limb from limb, here a throat.
here a head, fingers, feet -- dead.

Hands outstretched to slaughter a second,
Grendel dropped his first course,
spotting the bed where Beowulf slept.
He gripped that sleeper, though, and found himself 
conscripted, his own hand grabbed
by a commanding Geat. The grasp began
the tear that would take Grendel out, rendering him
a revenant in the hall he'd always reveled in.
His bones cracked, but he could not wrestle free
from the clasp, war-wedded to a woe-bringer,
who clung like no human ever clung,
keeping him close. Grendel was an unwilling draftee,
never bested before, nor held hostage.
Now Hygelac's man, chanting the boasts
he'd made his bed-rhyme, climbed from the covers
to get a better grip. Knuckles buckled, joints
unjoined. The attacker became the attacked -- 
racked with pain, attempting to escape,
to race from hall to fens, his hidden highways.
His own grasp unlatched, his flesh-locks loosened,
try though he might to divest himself of Heorot
and return home, dive into the dark and abide
with any awful thing there, stay in stealthy-health
the rest of his days. The room shook, benches splintered,
and Danes dreamt of doom, or quivered, questioning.
The warriors wrestled, muscles bulging, and raged,  
screaming for their lives, and the hall trembled
but stayed standing, its design fit for fighting,
the wooden walls crossed with iron bands,
a forest fettered together-though from what I've heard.
the mead-benches stood on end and shattered,
gold sigils no match for battle.
The two fighters fought on in the rubble.
I mean, damn, man, until this night, no Scylding
would've believed the hall could be felled
by anything but lame, its ivory and iron,
its careful cantilevers. Tonight, though, 780
it risked timbering.

A wailing clamor rose again, echoing
over the confines, and the North-Danes listened
to the sound of doom's hammer, instability
building a home in the hearts of those who heard it.
The whole hill quaked with the shriek
of that Almighty-abrogate, the loner's lament,
handcuffed by hopelessness, losing to an unforeseen 
leader. The warrior holding him was stronger 
than any monster, more muscular than any man.

That stalwartest of soldiers had no wish
to imprison the invader, only to slay him.
Grendel's life wasn't worth living, and Beowulf
had decided to end it. His own men
stood to as the unarmed enemies swung
heirloom blades willy-nilly;
though, really, their captain needed no safekeeping.
They swung for the slayer's soul, but their struggle
was for naught. They could've stayed sleeping
rather than fought, or merely watched
the battle, for their swords, sharp as they were,
couldn't injure the fiend -- his spells warded him,
annealing his skin. Still, his death would be agony.
The world clung to his fingers, and life-leaving
wouldn't be swift, no existence-snuffing
instantaneous gift, but sickly slow suffering,
his sinning spirit sent to sink
slowly down to Hell.

He knew it now, he who'd spent seasons haunting
this hall, preying on poets, bringing pain to the privileged,
infuriating the Almighty: his body was breached;
its bones were breaking. Hygelac's kinsman had him,
hand-welded. Each of them, living, canceled out the other,
as Cain had Abel, brother unbrothered.
Grendel's shoulder split, tendons twisting,
arteries unscrolled, his limb worried from him,
bested by fatal fists. Beowulf, the winner;
Grendel, dismissed. He ran then, for his grave,
still living. He rushed to the water,
wound weeping, lair his last longing.
His hourglass was emptying now,
his days done, and he knew it.
Each heartbeat wrote its number in red,
and the Ring-Danes were delivered
of their wretch with a wring:
this enemy was dead.

The ranger had arranged a cleansing, swept the hall
while the Danes were sleeping, done the danger in.
He was pleased with himself, a Geat-son's boasts
proven in the Danes' den. He'd unharrowed Heorot Hall
and Hrothgar's humiliations held no further horrors,
the darkness of recent fate now taking the form
of someone lately late-even if the whole wasn't here,
but only a hand, Grendel's arm, torn off by the hero
at the shoulder and hung on high,
the span of his grasp displayed.

Bro, I've heard when dawn broke, soldiers 
stampeded to the ring-hall, chieftains  coming to 
contemplate the cooling corpse-portion,
warriors and wild men from all over the realm, 
wide-eyed with wonder, overwhelmed at the sight 
of Grendel's tracks in the dirt, no sorrow there 
for those who'd suffered him, but satisfaction at the marks 
of misery where he'd conveyed himself from hall door 
to mere shore, bleeding out. He'd left a river of gore,
and the warriors had no regrets, imagining him 
dropping, a doomed carcass, into those wicked waters, 
which even now were blood-clotted, scarlet drifts.
O the gift of this! That devil-diver, deep in the dark,
dimmer, and dimmer yet, dying. dying, dead!
Here was the truth, everyone knew it,
Grendel was headed down, Hell-bent.

Off they went, the elderly officers,
and the young men behind them,
all mounted, white men on white horses,
praising their Heaven-sent hero, Beowulf,
with every word they spoke. Not north, nor south,
nor anywhere, they said, was there a man more
qualified to be king. There was a lot of country
between the coasts, a lot of open air beneath the sky,
and even there, nope, no one better to rule. Of course,
this unfettered praise wasn't meant to blame Hrothgar
for anything-no, no, that was a good king
They were giddy enough to gallop for
the first time in years, pale horses racing
on trails long unused, though famous
once for being smooth. And a poet,
a long-term comrade of the king.
a man mindful of meter with a
memory made of myriad myths,
began to compose The Tale of Beowulf:
his enviable exploits, and Geatish feats,
the sentences rhyming rapturously,
since now the man was elite enough for permanence.
The scop had opinions, and he shared them:
compare/contrast. Stories he'd heard
about another warrior, Sigemund. Verses detailing
that man's hidden past, stealthy acts, dark secrets
spat only into his kinsman's ear. The world-roaming
of Wael's defiant heir, all those old tales
whispered to Fitela, from uncle to nephew,
who'd together slain giants, their swords
strong as their certainties.

After he died, Sigemund was shaped
into story-glory for his crowning kill,
cutting through the hide of a hoard-holder,
a dragon whose cave he'd crawled inside,
outrageously alone, without even Fitela.
He was fortunate in his fortune-hunting:
his sword stabbed the serpent, and sliced it
like butter, straight through scale to stone,
and the dragon died, leaving bounty
and bones to Wael's son, who claimed
the treasure for himself. He loaded his ship
with glitter. The dragon, even dead,
was so embittered it melted, smelting
dark intention into the metal.
These days, everyone knows Sigemund's name:
the most famous exile. Far and wide
he swung his sword, and his fortunes swelled
in the years after King Heremod lost his way.
That king was attacked and betrayed,
stung in Jutland, ultimately undone.
His mood swings had mauled his men,
emboldened his foes, and fractured
his friends. Senility was suspected,
and his advisers sorrowed,
those who'd relied on him to think
clearly, those who'd trusted the inheritor
of the throne to behave as his daddy had:
reigning righteously, paying promptly,
shielding the Scyldings' safety.
Beowulf is surely such a man, adored by friends
and men and every living thing, but other kings
have hoarded horrors in their hearts..

While the scop spun, Danes and Geats raced,
harrowing the highway with hooves. The sunlight
was bright and brighter, and young men herded
themselves to Heorot, to gape at the gory
glory therein. The king himself, hoary, hallowed
hoard-holder, ring-bringer, came boldly from
out of the women's wing, good man incarnate,
flanked by ranks of ladies, his queen beside him,
and paced a path from maid-hall to mead-hall.

Hrothgar stood on the stairs, staring at the ceiling
he'd commissioned. Amid gold and gleam hung
Grendel's attrition, a lacerated limb.

"First and most fervent, we give thanks
to the ever-bearer for this sight, our long struggle
cleared in a single night. We've suffered years
of hall-harvesting here, but hard times are done
at last. God is good. Grendel is gone. Only yesterday,
I thought my heart would never be mended,
the evening-rending endless, this house
of heroes red-rouged, my council risking
life and limb to bed down in their home-hall,
and defend this place from demons,
yet every morning, dozens dead.
Now, with an Almighty assist, this man
has done what no man did before.
His mother, I forget who she is -- is she still alive? --
should be proud of her prince, an answer to prayers.
Beowulf, regardless of whether your parents
survive, you're my son now, adoption won
by wily work. 'Be good to me; I'll be good to you
I always say. You'll need nothing in life, boy,
I'll feed you, fete you, and count you
as my foundling. You're a king-to-be.
I've decorated countless others, treated lesser
warriors as brothers, and rewarded the inferior
for fearlessness, or what passed for it then.
Now, though, my standards have shifted.
You're more than a man, but an immortal:
your valor in this hall will live in legend.
I implore the Lord to keep you, my ward,
in His grace, and wield His power on your behalf."

Beowulf, Ecgtheow's son, replied:
"We're lucky to be living, having gone into battle
with only bright intentions, against a stranger
whose might we hadn't measured. I wish
you'd been awake to watch me bring war to your enemy,
to see him beaten, but it was not to be.
I meant to put him in a headlock, lash him
to his deathbed, and bludgeon him, clench my fists
around his throat, strangle till he gasped his last,
but alas, the Lord set him free.
What can I say? He slithered from my fingers
like a serpent, and slipped my knots, screeching
for the exit. He paid his passage in pulses,
though, and left a limb behind, holding the door:
his hand, arm, and shoulder. There they stayed,
proof of his incursion, much as he regretted it.
Behold! Nothing could live limited like that.
The last of his blood must have boiled by now,
braiding itself about his body, chaining him
in coils of pain. He's dying now,
if not already dead, a sinner
awaiting sentence. God, not me,
will judge him."

Previously prone to calling bullshit,
Unferth, Ecglaf's son, was stymied
as the roomful of nobles took note
of the horrible hand, hanging whole,
armpit to fingertips, high in the eaves.
The nails were notorious, hard as though
smith-forged, and the heathen's hand
was callused as a carpenter's, weathered
by work and warring. Everyone swore
to what they'd seen: no sword could stab
through that skin, no fight-fang tear it.

Then all hands were hauled on deck
by order of the king, to restore Heorot to its
former splendor, citizens resurrecting
glamour blunted by gore. The golden threads
in tapestries, depicting scenes of sweeter times,
distractions in gleaming designs, now
hung haphazard in the ruined room.
Reinforced as the walls had been,
they were still wreckage, door hinges bent,
braces broken. Only the ceiling remained uncracked.
The intruder had fled first, afraid of expiring
far from home. Death, no matter our desires,
can't be distracted. We know this much is true,
and it's true for all souls: each of us will one day
find the feast finished and, fattened or famished,
step slowly backward into their own dark hall
for that final night of sleep.

In due time, the Halfdane's heir appeared.
Tonight the king would dine triumphant
at his own table, reclaimed from ruin.
Never before had everyone shown up
so festive, so fiery, to pay tribute
to their bounty-bringer. Every major man
was there, pounding cups of mead. Even the king
shouted for rounds, his nephew Hrothulf
there beside him, spirits flowing, hearts glowing
in Heorot Hall. Back then, remember,
the Scyldings were not yet inclined
toward treachery, though things would change.
Hrothgar gave his own father's sword to Beowulf
presented it formally. With it a helmet, mail-shirt,
and war-banner, all precious property of his people.
Beowulf drank deeply, pleased and petted,
feted to the utmost, gifts raining down
upon him like pennies from Heaven.
The Halfdane's sword, the gold, the glitz:
the rest of the hall-soldiers watched it happen.

I mean, personally? I've never seen anything
like it, so many treasures sliding down the table,
a battle-dowry moved from man to man, over ale,
no less. No fighting? No fury? Nope, bro, this was
a certain type of night. The golden helmet, for example,
was ringed with ridges, wrapped in wire to tire any sword
that sought the skull of a shield-warrior occupied
with other enemies. Now the king called for eight
steeds to be led into the hall, each in its own
horse-helmet, harnessed in gold, and one mare
was buckled under Hrothgar's own saddle,
the same saddle he used for swordplay,
gem-dripping, blinged-out, brought forth only
when the king himself was slaying. That man, remember,
was the first to fight in wartime, the first to kill,
swinging before any of his boys could be slain.
Ing's descendant dropped all these delights upon Beowulf,
the weapons, the horses, ordering him to use them in health.
Yeah, the lord of Heorot paid properly,
tendered treasure for services rendered in blood.
Anyone knows how fair it was:
bro, more than fair.

And more than this, even, the king bequeathed
to each of the sea-soldiers on Beowulf's bench.
Every life-risker got a golden gift of his own,
and the man who'd been assassinated
by Grendel was vindicated in treasure.
The invader would've murdered many more,
had God not gotten in the mix.
One man's mettle kept the rest
from massacre. You have to look at it
this way, and reconcile yourself:
God's in charge, always has been,
always will be, and anyone who lives long
will endure both ecstasy and ugliness.

It was an hour for singing then, and instruments
were hauled out for the battle-bringing king,
who called for harps, epics, and heroic histories.
Healgamen, Hrothgar's poet, was ready with rhymes,
spitting the saga of the sons of Finn, word-whipping
his way into the fight in Friesland, the day
the Danish king, Hnæf of the Scyldings,
fell to lack of fealty.

"Hildeburh had nothing tender to say
about the Jutes and their loyalties.
She'd surrendered son and brother here,
her home-hall become a brutal battlefield.
Innocent of crime, yet cursed, captured,
speared, worse. Hoc's daughter was savaged
by sorrow, grief-gutted. Who wouldn't weep,
as dawn drove feud-daggers deeper, the sun scoring
her son's wounds, day breaking upon her dearest dead?
They'd been her heart, her happiness, her hopes.
War had wrung them ragged, dragged them to death
across a court of sword-crossed kin.

"There was no fighting now, no. Finn had only lack left.
He could not attack from here and battle to the end
with Hengest. Though this had been his own hall.
most of his men were dead, and what could Finn.
the host, do to preserve the rest
from their enemies? A truce was his only option,
a partitioned hall, sword split in half,
the Danes quartered in one portion, the Frisian throne
and edifice now a shared territory. Daily, he'd give gifts
to both sides, his hands open as widely
to Hengest and his men, unwillingly ruled over
by their ring-lord's reaper, as to his own men, the Frisians.
They'd all be encouraged in encomiumns,
given hope with heirlooms. Everyone would be hostage
to hall-jollity, and beer would be drunk without jeering,
both sides pacified by precious things.
This, then, was the treaty. The agreement
was sealed in gold, all former fighters
guaranteed greed-grace. It was sworn solemnly
to Hengest by Finn, and any Frisian who broke it,
who thought he might divide the room
with whispered insults, raising recent wrath
with snide ribbing, would be pricked.
The sword's point would decide.

The pyre was built, gold unhoarded, to properly mourn
the Scyldings' king, who slumbered on his death-weald,
awaiting warmth he'd never feel. The landscape was littered
with reddened metal, mail-coats gored, links bent,
boar-shaped helmets, dented where swords had scraped
skulls. Other bodies, too, of noble Danes, unraveled
by gaping wounds, traveling to journey's end.

Hildeburh sent her son to his last station
at Hnæf's shoulder, their soul-vessels
to be burnt together: family, finally, in flame.
She raised her voice in mourning, keening for her kin
as the pyre was lit. Smoke smothered her song, darkness
made of skin and bone. These men who'd been tended
by those who loved them were carcasses now,
heads melted, wounds running, reopened
for flame-ravens. Fire comes from the same
family as famine. It can feast, unfulfilled, forever.
The dead of both nations were done,
glory days gone for good. The fighters fell away,
finding families and forts across Friesland,
visiting the living. too long close-quartered
with corpses.

"Hengest, though, boarded a wicked winter
in Finn's hall, heart howling for his
own king and hearth, the weather too wild
to loosen his ship. For him, the ice and snow
were tinted red, and kept him clinging
to a killing country. At last, as always happens, 
the season shifted to spring. Another year appeared, 
sunlight, green tendrils, the earth's bosom in bloom,
a time for returning, the exiled yearning for home... 
But more than that, to get it done with, the avenging, 
without which Hengest would be unmanned.
He itched to bring justice to Jutes.

"When Hunlafing lay a legendary sword in his lap, well
it was named Flame-Fang for a reason. Any season
is a season for blood, if you look at it in the right light.
The Jutes knew this blade already. They should've
expected it to twist, to key their kingdom.
Hengest only did what he had to do: tipped the pitchers,
spilt the ale, red rivers running under wooden benches.
Finn fell when Guthlaf and Oslaf,
hard henchmen, brought up the last winter's battle,
blaming brutality on their bold host, and their grief
on him, too, the pain of their loss unquenched,
the only remedy blood-balm. The Scyldings washed the walls
with rancor, slew Finn and all his men, and bore away
his world-queen. They ransacked the hall for a hoard,
grabbing all the treasure they could hold, golden collars,
jewels. Onward, then, over the sea, and back to Denmark,
they brought their woman, straight-spined, returning her
to the country she'd come from."

That dark entertainment was done -- words had won over wine
long enough. Now laughter conquered conversation.
Serving boys poured pleasure from pitchers. Wealhtheow,
weighted in gold, processed to her place between two good men,
Hrothgar and his nephew Hrothulf, who back then yet trusted
in the links of lineage. There, too, waited Unferth, at the feet
of those men, the Scylding's lords, who trusted him, too --
perhaps not as much as they trusted themselves --
but still, a brave man, though a sibling-slayer,
brilliant, though a brother-breaker.

The lady offered up all she had to trade:
"Accept this cup from me, my lord of rings, and lift
this golden goblet. Give the Geats their due. Be good
to them who've been good to you. Gifts are for granting,
and your hands should be open, your heart happy,
even as you remember-I know you do-the good men
who gave kith-gifts to you. Heorot's red walls have been
whitewashed, purged of horror. And I hear you've chosen
a brand-new son, this Cain-cleansing warrior. I know you know
that life is short, that you are mortal-the blessings you bask in
today are boons for bequeathing. I ask only that you gift the kingdom
to your kin, before your sword is sheathed in smoke. I know
your nephew Hrothulf well, his noble blood, his moral code --
 he'll serve our sons and raise them right,
I trust he'll treat them sweetly, if you should die
before he does, repaying our kindness with son-safety. 
We took him in when his father died, and if he recalls it at all, 
he knows how to behave: we gave the orphan everything, 
made him one of our brave men, when he'd have been alone."
She bent then to her boys' bench, where
Hrethric and Hrothmund sat, with all the young sons
of chieftains. There, too, was a grown man, good, great
Beowulf the Geat, positioned between them.

She brought him the cup. She called him friend.
She gave him gold. Her will was wrought
in rings. She offered armlets, garments, a neck-ring:
a collar larger than any I've ever seen,
heavy as Heaven is light, and all of it brighter
and better than any hoard since Hama's,
who himself hooked the flaming throat-chain
of the Brisings, those amber god-reins,
and trekked it back to his own fortress,
fleeing Eormenric's treachery
and securing his soul with gold-barter.

And later, hear it: Hygelac the Geat, Swerting's nephew,
would be the final owner. In his last battle,
beneath banners, he'd hold to his hoard, fighting furiously,
shackled to this sparkling string, this precious, poisonous thing.
Fate would fell him and his prideful priorities, the Frisians
following his feud-fuel, and he in heavy armor, gem-governed,
would be slain. He'd worn that same sparkle when he crossed
the sea-coupe, but even champagne goes flat. His bling
would go to Frankish kings, from plundered breastplate
to that famous throat-chain, and lowlier warriors
would gloat over the goners, getting what gold they could
from Geat corpses, a field full of the forgotten.

The hall thundered with handclaps. Wealhtheow went on
with her gift-giving, thus witnessed: "Take this golden collar,
dear Beowulf. May it keep your head on straight.
Wear this mail-shirt, too-a treasure of my people.
May it protect your heart-hoard. Guide my two sons,
guard them, keep them as they are tonight,
and I will keep you as you are: draped in delights.
You're famous here, and long after your lifetime,
you'll be known, your story sweeping as the sea,
shores borne into being by waves of words.
My prince, may you be blessed by this bounty.
Keep my sons close. Treat them as we treat one another
here in Heorot: tenderly, trustingly, loyally.
No one conspires to hurt -- only to hold fast with brothers.
Believe me, Beowulf: my thanes' wishes align with mine
The sole desire of those drinking here,
is to do my bidding when it comes to you."

She settled into her seat. Wine waterfalled into men's mouths --
it was a banquet unmatched in munificence. After all,
they had no foretelling of Fate's fixed plans. A shadow
stretched over sweetness, formless and fatal.
Night fell and Hrothgar readied himself for rest,
his quarters calling him to sleep. Men stood guard,
as they always had. The floor that bristled with benches
became a swan-road, white waves of bolster and feathers,
and though one of those drinkers turned dreamers
was doomed, he didn't know it.

The Geats shields served as shining headboards,
and on each bench was arranged a helmet, hulking,
a mail-shirt with rings like linked fingers, and
a splinterless spear, tree-sleek, ready for wrath
anytime, to be brought into play without notice,
as was the habit of their homeland and war-wanderings.
They were ready to wreak havoc, anytime, anyplace --
their lord was a lucky lord. The Geats were hard-core,
but even Geats need sleep, so sleep swept them away.
One dreamer would die dreaming. This was nothing new,
given Grendel's former residence in the golden hall,
but his eviction had made evil dwindle in the minds
of the defenders. That story, they thought, was over.

There was another chapter. An avenger lay in wait,
counting sworded seconds until the latest hour,
her heart full of hatred. Grendel's mother,
warrior-woman, outlaw, meditated on misery.
She lived, ill-fated, sinking beneath cold currents
1260 to her kingdom under-country, her line linked
to extinction since Cain crossed swords with Abel
and fled, murder-marked, to make his home
in wastelands, solitary and silent. From Cain came
more misery, a legacy of lost souls.
Grendel was one of those, banished and blasted:
He'd found a waker among the dreamers, a battle
amid the beds, and wrestled the warrior who'd
woken into war. Beowulf saw himself as God's gift,
Grendel as a goner; he used his strength to slay
1270 the intruder, trusting in his Father to protect him,
as He always had. He bled the hellion, and
Grendel fled piecemeal, no Heaven for him,
no honey, only rushing through a haunted hall to die
in his own mausoleum. Now his mother was here,
carried on a wave of wrath, crazed with sorrow,
looking for someone to slay, someone to pay in pain
for her heart's loss. She found the path,
and made her way to Heorot.
56
Ring-Danes were dreaming there, a murdering herd
1280 of sleepers, drooling, drunk, their feast filling them.
They were the cream of the crop, but soon
they'd be chaff, scythed from swordsmen
into skeletons. She was the one to do it.
The horror wasn't muted by the measure
of women's strength against men's brawn.
Both can hold slaying swords, glazed with gore,
and score the boar-crests from war-helmets,
warming them with blood.
In Heorot Hall, hard-honed blades were yanked
1290 from over benches, shields shouldered
to cover blinking sleepers, waking bareheaded,
barechested, stunned by her arrival. She moved
swiftly, knowing she had only moments to sift men
for her vengeance and remain among the living.
She tore a warrior from his bed, and dragged him,
defenseless, to her fen. This was Hrothgar's best friend,
most adored on the land between the two salt seas,
warrior and retainer. She slew him sleeping.
Beowulf was lucky, bedded elsewhere. After the brawl.
1300 gift-quarters had been appointed him like rings.
The Geat was asleep when Grendel's mother struck.
Heorot Hall howled-she'd taken their trophy, too:
$7
Grendel's hand! Man by man, they squalled.
This was unjust, a bad bargain that both sides should suffer
losses, though the war was dealt and done, themselves
the clear winners. The wise king. gray and battle-brittle,
moaned when he knew the news, that his closest adviser,
nearest-to-ear, was no more, doornail-dead.
Beowulf, blood-blessed boy, was hauled from sleep,
1310 hustled hungover to the king's bedside.
Boot to boot with his band,
he marched to the room where
Hrothgar waited, grim and gloomy,
wondering if his fate was fucked forever,
the Almighty refusing to relent.
Beowulf and his boys threw the doors open
to sunlight and rattled the floorboards,
no ground given to grief. Beowulf thundered
up to the morose prince and asked:
1320 Had Hrothgar slept well?
Hrothgar had no words. He said some anyway.
"Don't speak to me of happiness! Hard times
have come again! The Danes are in darkness!
Eschere is murdered! Yrmenlaf's big brother,
and my best friend! My battle bro when ranks
were closing and boar-helms bashed
58
into brainpans! He was there, hand to my heart,
a man like no other, terror-tested, never bested
until tonight, when a slaughterer withdrew him,
30 and spirited him from Heorot!
Where is she? Who knows!
Glutting on gobbets, after murdering him
unopposed. This is on you. She threw
herself into a blood feud after you slew her son
Grendel last night, tore him and bore him
into the afterlife, never mind years of his own crimes.
You gripped him, held him, and he lost the fight,
fell to the mat, and died. He's followed by another now,
an evil intruder, his mother, fueled by fury, a woman
1340 seeking vengeance for her son. She goes too far,
even as a soldier might in avenging his king,
grieving the loss of his ring-giver.
That hand, which once stretched wide, filled
with golden gifts, now still and cold.
"Well. I've heard my people, those simple citizens
who live out in the muddy country, say they've seen
these two together, roaming the moor,
wading the mere, heath-rambling and of a height.
One is, as far as they can tell, a woman,
1350 and the other, miSshapen, formed like a man,
but larger than any man has a right to be.
59
He was named Grendel, a fatherless son.
Who knows whether he had other kin.
He was a sin-walker, is all they said,
those who've talked to me of these things.
They say the two stalked the hillsides,
the concealed country. They denned with wolves
and dove in windy rivers, slipped like mist-fish
into the fen and through it, down into the
1360 darkest places underwater and underground,
cliff-bound. It's not far from here, the mere,
but it's a world away, a forest frosted
even in green months, old wood, wicked
and well-rooted. Water reflects trees
like tangled teeth, a gaping maw that, at night,
is lit with flames in the flood. No one's ever
touched the bottom. No one born of man, anyway.
Men can't go in. Even animals, a heath-hopping hart,
held to mere's edge by hounds, would sooner spin
1370 on hooves and fight, lower horns, and ready itself for death
than step upon that stinking sod and dive into the dark.
That is a bad place. Waves roil, and taste the sky's edge,
winds gust, clouds spit and spark, and when it storms,
mere mixes with mist, geysers up, and Heaven moans.
rll say it again: this is on you.
Everything depends on a boy who knows nothing of this terror,
not least what you might fear when you get there,
60
the nerves that might make you quake
in horror's homestead. Go in, if you dare.
380 I'll pay in gold, old and new, heirloomns
and holdings lately wrought, if only
you return having done it."
Beowulf, son of Ecgtheow, was open for business:
"No worries, wise one, I've got this. When a friend
needs to be avenged, it's better to fight than cry.
Even when mourning, this is how it goes.
We're all going to die, but most of us won't go out
in glory. Here's what matters, though, for men:
not living, but living on in legend. I'm not afraid.
1390 Stand up, protector of this place, and let us go together,
following Grendel's mother's tracks. I give you my fist
she won't get away from Beowulf. There's no asylum,
no cleavage cracks in Mother Earth, no tree-barrow,
no ocean I can't find her in, wherever she hides.
Live through today, Hrothgar, it's the end of your miseries.
Be as brave as your scops say you are."
The old king stood and thanked God, mighty as ever,
for the promises of this prince. A horse was bridled
for Hrothgar, its mane knitted into war-braids,
1400 and the wise one, master of many, mounted
his sparkling steed, his statuus visible for miles
61
His army followed on foot, shields raised,
pacing murderer's tracks, leaving their own uncovered
they had no need to hide their hunting from her.
She'd gone overland, straight through the dark,
carrying the corpse of the comrade she'd killed, best beloved,
right-hand man, second set of eyes for Hrothgar.
The descendants of chieftains rode over razor-edged
rocks, through perilous passageways, places off-map
1410 paths too slender for company, where sea monsters
sang and cliffs called for suicides. Hrothgar took
the front, his crew behind him, examining
her tracks, unhappily imagining the path ahead.
Finally, the trees leaned longingly toward
the stones, their needles bending as if to break,
a grove of ghosts. There was the mere,
water welling up like something wound-wrung.
red as blood. Though they'd known their man
was dead, they suffered afresh to discover
1420 in the mere a dark gift: there, at cliffs edge,
lay Æschere's head.
The company stared as water boiled with blood and bones.
A war-horn sounded, over and over, but the soldiers
sagged and sat down. The mere was full of monsters.
too many to mention: serpentine salt-dragons,
62
lizards in lethargy, lying on stones, the kinds of creatures
that surface seething in ships' wakes to bare teeth and twist
about an oar, foil fishers and bring bad omens to sailors.
The beasts dove, furious and frightened at the noise,
1430 the bugle and battlers' shouts, the shrillness of seekers
in their secret space. A Geat drew his bow and struck
a slithering one. An arrow piercing its scales, it struggled
and thrashed in the water. The other men, invigorated,
sought to join the killing; a second shot, a third,
then they slung themselves into the shallows
and speared it. This monster they could control.
They cornered it, clubbed it, tugged it onto the rocks,
stillbirthed it from its mere-mother, deemed it damned,
and made of it a miscarriage. They examined its entrails,
1440 awed and aggrieved.
Meanwhile, Beowulf gave zero shits.
He dressed himself in glittering gear,
his mail-shirt finely forged, links locked
and loaded. He'd meet this murdering mother
under mere, and amend her existence.
Even if she tried to smother him, his bone-cage
would stay intact. No weakness here. His helmet,
bright against the bleak backdrop, would save his skull
from the watery substrate, from the black mud
1450 and curious currentS-hammered gold for a glamour-ond
63
made by one long gone, jewels and boar-shaped ornaments
imbued by the smith with power to keep other men from dying.
No battle-teeth could test it, no sword slice that shine.
Gold is good.
Last, but not least, Unferth, Hrothgar's left-hand man,
unexpectedly stanned for Beowulf, and handed him
his heirloom, Hrunting, an ancient hilted sword,
written with runes of ruin, iron blade
emblazoned with poison shoots, each bud
1460 reddened with enemy blood. In war, it never failed
to score flesh, had never been wrested from the fist
of him who held it. It was a sublime soldier's sword,
meant to limb enemies, and this wasn't the first time
it urged a hero to perform a feat.
Unferth sent his sword to the more skillful swordsman.
Note: the stone-bold son of Ecglaf had been blackout drunk
when he said that stuff he'd said, the rant he'd decanted
into Beowulf's ear. He wasn't man enough to dive
into rotten depths seeking someone so savage; he'd forgotten it
1470 now. He sought not to risk his skin, so surrendered
his chance at fame. Why sign up for endless night when
another man is armored, able, and ready to fight?
64
Beowulf, Ecgtheow's son, laid out his plan:
"My man, king of wisdom, ring-bringer, I'm about
to dive deep. Keep those words in mind,
the pledge we exchanged, that dearly done deal.
To recap: you, Halfdane's son, said that
I'm your son now, adopted and owned,
that ifI died in this dive, you'd father me
1480 to a further shore. In short: I end up dead,
you pay my corps-feed them, pour them mead.
Also, adored Hrothgar, you swore
you'd send Hygelac my gold-get,
array for my Geat-lord the treasures I won,
and show him what keys this kingdom's
deeded me, what a generous giver you are,
what a son I was to you while I lived.
And Unferth! To that soldier I bequeath
my father-forged heirloom, my wave-winging
1490 war-blade. I'll gain fame with his Hrunting.
or be harvested by Hell."
The prince of Weather-Geats was done standing on ceremony.
He stepped to the mere's edge, and dove like a stone,
thrown not to skip, but to weight a ship-shrouded corpse.
Darkness drew him down. Most of a day was done
before he could see the contours of the bottom,
65
She who'd ruled these floodlands proudly for
a hundred seasons, ferocious, tenacious, rapacious,
yes, she felt his presence in her realm, and knew
1500 a man from above was invading the below.
She swam and seized him, but his body was swathed
boar-helm, war-shirt-and she couldn't peel the mail
to reveal his dread fate, nor impale him on fingernails.
She dragged him through dregs instead; the sea-wolf
slung the soldier out of the abyss and into her hall.
He was too tightly held to wield his sword, no matter h
he wished to war against her. As she swam, a shoal
came seeking to school him: a scrimshaw selection
of sea monsters, rising out of the dark, tunneling with
1510 tooth and tusk, spearing and jeering. Sharks, seals,
squealing beasts boring through the bog, biting
at his battle-shirt. The warrior squintedd
in the shadows and made out the domed walls
of the hall, damming back the damned waters,
the mere made sere by engineering.
He saw the glow of a fire, brilliant light
flaming up and flaring, and then, at last,
he saw her: the reclusive night-queen,
the mighty mere-wife. Fearless, he heaved
1520 his sword to take her life, swinging with all
his strength so the edge rang against her skull,
66
ut
it
was
to no
avail:
his
war-torch
dimmed.
his
blood-boldness
gone.
She was
impervious
immed.
il: his
war-torch
was
din
his blood-b
to
his
blade.
The
sword
had
failed
him,
though
it'd
served
many
worthy
soldiers,
skinned
many
adversaries,
slicing
armor,
hacking
helmets
into
hash.
This was the first time
the
heirloom
hadn't
overwhelmed an
enemy
Hygelac's
heir was
bent on
blood,
thinking
I0 of legacy,
of legend.
He hurled the sword:
ow
useless
hoard-gilt.
Let it shatter in the silt.
He'd fight like a man,
and take her hand to hand,
his fingertips
blueprinting
her skin. This is what
real men
must do, come on, we all know the truth:
if you want to win, you
have to forget you're atraid to die.
The Geat was ready to rumble, pissed now.
He roared a challenge.,
warmed for war with
Grendel's mother, twisting her hair around his fist,
raging, swinging her by her own skein, flinging
1540 her to crash against the kingdom she'd reigned over.
She rose again, relentless, and turned on him. gripping
and flipping him. The pugilist panicked. His certainty
crumbling. he took flight and fell. He began,
sick-hearted, to hear his death knell, his sure feet
fumbling. his fight-spirit fugitive.
67
She bent over his breast, held the hall-invader
hard to the stones, and drewa long knife. The mere-wife
meant to avenge her son, her sole heir, but Beowulf's mail
shielded him, his shoulder safe in the sclerite of some
1550 smith's genius, links staying locked to bend her blade.
Ecgtheow's heir would've been filleted, recategorized
as MIA, and left to rot in her cavern, had not his suit
saved him. That, too, was God's work.
The Lord, maker of miracles, sky-designer,
had no trouble leveling the playing field
when Beowulf beat the count and stood.
He glimpsed it hanging in her hoard, that armory
of heirlooms, somebody's birthright. A sword,
blessed by blood and flood, ancient, dating from
1560 the dawn of things, so tremendous only a hero
could heft it, though all would envy it. Beowulf gripped
the giant's sword at the hilt, and then he, the Scylding's
main man, in desperation, not expecting to exist after this
night, swung it at his enemy with all his might.
It was enough: he cleaved her spine. Those bone-rings
given by God were bitten through, the house of her head
raided, as her hall had been. She bent as though
praying.
68
and was spent, sinking to the stones. The sword sweated red;
the swordsman regretted nothing.
1570 The light was strong now, a brilliance
like flame and tallow meeting in a sky
sick of sleep, and Beowulf took the volume
of the vault, itemizing everything.
his sword held high as defense
against any other awfulness that sought
him here. Hygelac's hit man had more
in mind. He sought to repay Grendel
for his wrath, for every night he'd spent
ravening, not just the first evening he'd come
1580 to Heorot, helping himself to fifteen
Danes and holding another fifteen hostage,
dragging them from home into horrors.
Against the far wall, our hero found Grendel,
still as a sleeper, war-riven,
a cadaver, cold and collapsed,
heartless after his time in Heorot.
Beowulf desecrated the dead,
swinging the sword again and again,
and rending the flesh, a heft, a wrench,
1590 removing Grendel's head.
69
Above, Hrothgar's men surrounded the mere,
holding the fort as best they could. Suddenly,
they saw the waters boil with blood, a roiling of gore,
salt, and sorrow. They lowered silvered heads.
"Oh no," said the old men, tightly packed
around their prince. That was a sad day.
They wept for lost wishes, sure they' d never see
Beowulf again, let alone witness him, in triumph,
presenting his kill to their king. The sea-wolf had
1600 savaged him, everyone agreed, and it was lunchtime.
The brave Scyldings forsook the cliff top and took
their gold-giver home, but the visiting Geats, now vagrant,
stayed-hopeless, heartsick, staring into the churning mere,
yearning against all evidence for their lord to reappear.
Below, in Beowulf's hands, the slaying-sword
began to melt like ice, just as the world thaws
in May when the Father unlocks the shackles
that've chained frost to the climate, and releases
hostage heat, uses sway over seasons to uncage
1610 His prisoner, Spring, and let her stumble into the sun.
The Geat's glory got nothing else from that estate,
though he eyeballed the treasures Grendel's mother
had collected. He took only head and hilt, jewel-scabbed
salvaged gilt. The blade itself had bled out,
70
the inscriptions on it smeared to smut, so scathing
was the blood of the slain stranger. It was done.
The man who'd made it through alive, survivor
of his enemy's annihilation, swam as fast
as he could swim, undoing his dark dive.
1620 The mere ran clear and pure, now
the ruler of the deep had unclasped her hand
from ephemeral existence, letting loose her life.
He surfaced at last, the hardy-hearted captain,
swimming to shore, reveling in the heft of his hoard,
the sea-chest he carried. Stunned, his men ran
to meet him, thanking all that was holy, his loyal
entourage rejoicing, shouting that he was risen,
their lord, their leader, their all. They undressed him,
freeing him of his armor, letting him breathe air
1630 instead of water. The mere was peaceful now,
though battle-pinked, reflecting the cloudy sky above.
iearts singing with love, they returned
from stranger's country by twisted trails,
lapping the Earth with strides onto known roads,
safe roads. The boldest men among them
carried Grendel's head, a hard task,
heaving it onto the heath from over sea-cliffs.
These men were major, massive, and committed
71
Four brave warriors paired off to bear the gore hallward.
1640 a skull spitted on a spear-litter. They approached
Heorot together, celebrating as they went,
fourteen ferocious, war-worked Geats, trampling
down the meadow, Beowulf among them,
blending into his brothers, matching step for step.
That leader of men entered the hall a hero,
and made his way to Hrothgar, grit-written.
His crew dragged Grendel's head into the mead-hall,
where a meal was being served, and a host of lesser men
ferried cups to mouths. In their midst was the queen of the house,
1650 their hoard, their treasure. The Danes stared, jaws dropped.
Beowulf made a speech to end all speeches, that son of Ecgtheow.
"So, we're back from the brink, Halfdane's son, Scyldings'
savior,
bringing you this token of our esteem, sea-booty, gore-loot,
no big whoop. Here's to glory! And now, my story.
I don't mean to say this shit was no thing. I lived through
your basic fistfight underwater, a tryst with destruction.
I did the deed you deemed necessary, but I'd be bluffing
ifI didn't say I would've died had God not kept me close.
Though my sword seemed severe, I'd have been helpless,
1660 hadI had only Hrunting. Hard-core as it is, it failed
when I brought it to battle. God gave me grace-He sometimes
72
Saves the solitary-on a ledge glowed another blade,
marvelous enough to mend the mistake I'd made
trying to take on Grendel's mother in her own lair-lake.
Speed was my only advantage, solo as I was. I snatched
the sword, striking down the bitch that sought
to slay me, scoring the other, too, her son. The blade
blistered as it touched their blood, and rivers of red
rushed over it, unforging it from fire-fang, into what
1570 you see here, a bladeless hilt. I brought it from below,
having avenged the Danes' death. That's all I need to say,
except that I promise you and every nobleman here, your sleep
is safe now. Your corps can defend you, whether brave boys
or bold men-you need not worry for their lives or longevity,
Lord of Scyldings, nor fear anyone surging up from the mere.
We're done with that damage."
The hilt was handed off into the hard hands
of the ring-lord, a relic older than any ruler,
rendered in iron by giants, and inherited, after
1680 enemies perished, by the Danish king.
When the gruesome Grendel gave up the ghost,
when God won over him and his mother, when that
murderous pair was rendered moribund, it made sense
that such a sweet piece, this smith-struck sword.
would go to the prince, the loftiest lord between
the salt seas, the guy who gave the greatest gifts on Earth.
73
Hrothgar considered his convictions. He handled the hilt,
an ancient thing, a fossil from forgotten days,
squinting at the legend left there for the literate.
1690 It was engraved with an epic inscrutable to him,
the story of how war woke in the world, and a flood brewed,
drowning the race of giants, placing them beneath the waves,
a punishment for others, poor Lord-lacking unbelievers,
sin-soaked strangers, severed from sanctuary.
On the golden guard, the runes were written perfectly,
the true name of the sword's first owner,
long since ash, for whom it had been forged,
with its twisted hilt and serpent-slipped steel.
There was silence until Halfdane's son spoke.
1700 "A ruler who's been known as a good man since
days of old, a generous, just gift-giver, a war-wielding
homeland healer, is equipped to say the following:
this man's as good a man as me. Beowulf, my boy!
You've proven yourself in every context. Your name
will be known around the world. You're steady, strong,
and sure in all respects. I open my arms to you, as agreed,
and fulfill the bonds of friendship. For your people,
you'll be, like me, a defender and a hero.
But... hold up, hear me out, indulge me a moment.
1710 Heremod, that old king, was no hopeful hero to the heirs
74
of Ecgwela, the Honor-Scyldings. His rise was their fall.
He raged, cut down close comrades, aged advisers,
and when he died, he died galled and alone, friendless,
though famous. God had given him grace-granted him
wealth, health, and power. His road had no rocks on it.
He'd known only joy. Somehow, though, his heart
was not a hawk but a drone. He bombed his own bases,
denied his Danes damages, kept entrenched in combat.
He commanded his kingdom's collapse, and was, when ancient,
1720 loathed where he could've been loved, his life lesioned
with losses. Listen to me, boy. Keep your shit straight.
I've been fostered by frost-seasons, fathered by time,
and I'm dropping knowledge now.
Here's one of the world's wonders: God is good.
He's given us gifts-the capacity for clarity granted our kind.
He runs the show, though, manages every aspect of existence.
Sometimes He gives a man from a good clan room to roam
wherever he desires, every instant filled with joy,
lets him run his own kingdom and rule over boys
1730 who guard his borders, stand-uP guys who'd die for him.
God does this for so many decades that the man himself,
because men in the end are fools, forgets how things work.
He shirks his soul-keeping. 1here ll be no changes for him,
he thinks, no end in sight, no loss of love or life.
He wallows like a bear in honey, unstunngg,
75
and nothing scathes him, not sickness nor sorrow,
nor does his mood darken, nor do his enemies find him.
their blades sharp and stealthy, no-instead the world
wends to his will. He notices nothing nasty in himself,
1740 until one day everything changes.
Every guard goes down eventually,
sagging on the stone wall surrounding the soul.
Here, while the sentry's sleeping, a sniper strikes,
sending a spike into the man's heart. Now he's poisoned,
selfishness searing his certainty-he's never needed
to defend himself against internal threats, but the greedy orders
of this beastly boss make him think the halls he's guarded,
the treasures he's watched over for decades, are nothing
compared to what he deserves. He hoards, hisses,
1750 hides his gold, refuses support to those who've served
him. He forgets his debts, Fortune's amnesiac,
blacking out bounty in favor of bitterness.
Turn to the end of the story: I'll wait.
His body weakens, fails, falls. An inheritor
crawls into his throne and passes that king's heirlooms,
his protected and precious things, to anyone he wishes to woo,
no regard for the dead man's worth, rituals, or requirements.
"Armor yourself against that kind of idiocy, my brave boy,
my Beowulf. Keep yourself on an even keel, aiming
1760 your ambition at eternity, instead of the everyday.
76
Don't let avarice override intelligence. It's only a season
that a young soldier's strength stays stalwartbefore
plague or blade bring obsolescence. A crackling
blaze, a rush of waves, a slippery sword-grip,
a spear soaring silently through the air,
or even the ague of age. Your gaze will darken, too, boy.
Your world will dim. Death will kneel over you eventually,
and solicit your surrender.
"Hear me now. I ruled the Ring-Danes
1770 for fifty years, fighting adversaries, holding borders,
our spears and swords against assassins of every nation,
until I thought my enemies were casualties, Earth
emptied of them. I relaxed into comfort and fortune,
and just as we celebrated our conquering every kingdom,
then, then came Grendel. He waited in the darkness,
invaded my inner sanctum with savagery, broke my spirit,
and drove me into a dark depression.
Thank God, thank all that is holy, I lived long enough
to see you bring me
Grendel's head, sword-split
1780 after years of struggle. Now I can look upon it,
crow, and count him a corpse
Oh, but I've gone on too long.
Sit down, golden boy, heir of this hall. Feast. There'l be
more
rewards in the morning, from my hands to vours
"
Beowulf grinned, and tookhis assigned seat,
set by his elder king. A bench bedecked in Beowulf!
Then the Danes and Geats got down to business.
The celebration began in earrnest-the room was filled
and a banquet bowed the tables. Night hooded the ha
1790 and wrapped ail who celebrated in starry dark.
At last, the companions rose-their elder was ebbingand
called for sleep. The Geat followed suit,
weary after warfare, heartsick for home,
accomnpanied by a hall-officer who led him
from the company, there to tend to every desire,
a butler of burdens, bleaching away bloodshed1
and battle, packing off pain.
It was no more than Beowu1f deserved.
He dove into dreams, as above him
1800 the hall stretched toward Heaven, its gilt
and vaulted ceilings shielding the hero's heart.
At dawn, a black raven called out the melody of morning,
the happiness of inhabiting the heavens. Sunlight snatched
shadows
from corners, and wayward warriors readied themselves
for removal--hungering for home. Their leader was up at
once
looking into the distance, his soul seeking his ship.
78
The fierce fighter called for Hrunting to be brought,
and bade Unferth receive it, with thanks for the loan.
He complimented its blade, and said it had been
810 a friend to him, powerful in battle. He mentioned
nothing about the dullness of the edge
he had no urge to nurture a grudge.
Now the warriors were ready to roll, armor on,
hearts set on home. Their prince approached the dais
where the king awaited, and knelt at Hrothgar's feet,
confident and canny.
Beowulf (Ecgtheow's own) said the proper words:
It's time for us who set sail to save this king's land,
to tell you we're overdue to return to our own man,
1820 Hygelac. At Heorot, we've been held as kin,
hosted, kept comfortable, and if there's anything more
I can do for you, beyond the battles I've won,
any more of your heart I can win by warring,
demand it: your wish is my command.
IfI ever hear a whisper over the whale-road
that your walls are wobbling, that neighbors
are invading, that enemies are afoot, as enemies
are wont to be, I'll appear with a horde of thousands,
and bring them to bear. Hygelac may not be gray
1830 like you, he may seem young to rule, but know this
he has my back. He'll heed my call if you need help,
and bring speech and sword to support me, assisting you
with any needs, as you would me -- your new son.
I'll bring a spear-forest, a ferocious force,
should you need fighters. And if your son Hrethric
should come to foster in Geatland, a Dane-king's voyager
in Hygelac's court, he'll find friends there.
Foreign shores share their secrets
with those who are themselves worthy."

1840 Overcome, Hrothgar answered him:
"The Lord, all-knowing put words in your mouth,
Beowulf, words of love. I've never heard a boy-a man
manage such diplomacy, such propriety, so easily.
Your body's made of steel, your mind mercury,
your tongue gold, and if Hrethel's son should-
I'm not saying he will-die in battle, a sword,
spear, or sickness slaying that princely protector
of your kind, and you remain alive, I'm certain
with all I know that the Geats would never find
1850 a better man to be their well-won king and protector,
if you should want that level of lordship,
that intense responsibility.
I like you more every moment, Beowulf.
You've bonded two tribes.
The Danes and Geats are peace-woven now,
80
despite our harrowing history.
We've fought fiercely in the past,
but now we're friends forever.
As long as I'm king of this remote place,
1860 my treasury will spill into your coffersall
that's mine on offer, from sea to shining sea.
All the ships that cross will carry gifts to you.
I know now what I did not before-your people
are like my people, perfect and prized,
defenders of the good against the god-awful."
The Dane's defender dropped gold in the hand
of the Geat's glory, twelve treasures more
given in health and wealth, and bid him
take himself to shore now, but come back
1870 anytime. The old king had run out of ceremonies.
He kissed his new best boy, his adopted kin,
throwing his arms about his neck and weeping.
Two premonitions overtook him, shaking him
to the core, the stronger one that they'd never meet again.
Beowulf was so dear to him he couldn't
stop trembling-but in his heart and mind's eye,
he foresaw that keeping this savior son nearby
could only end in flame. He opened his arms.
He let him go.
81
1880 Beowulf went forth, a golden warrior
striding across green grasses. While peering
off cliffs, he tallied his rewards. His ship
waited impatiently on him, tugging at her anchor.
All the gifts given by Hrothgar would be weighed
as they went on. "That was a good king," his men agreed,
perfect in every way, until time, robber of vaults,
stole his strength and swapped it for softness.
Down they marched to the shore, bright boys reveling
in metal dress and battle-gains, stamping in glee.
1890 The land-watch took note of them from afar,
as he had at their arrival, this time without rancor
he raised his hand and rode in greeting, arriving
as they boarded their vessel, gifts glinting in sunlight.
He announced to the assembled that the departing heroes
would surely be celebrated in Geatland. They pulled
the ship to sand and filled it with a king's ransom:
gems and gold, horses and armor, the mast marking
the spot of their treasure. They hefted Hrothgar's heirlooms
whole cloth into the hold, gifting even the coastguard
1900 a sword, gold-wrapped and gorgeous, so that later
he'd be able to flash it while drinking,
and say he'd been there when.
82
They shoved the ship trom the spit, keel splashing
into salt, Denmark soon distant. Sails whipped
about her mast, a veil tor her sea-gaze.
Ropes tautened and timbers moaned.
Winds surged to skip the vessel like a
smooth stone across the ocean, white with foam,
lifted by light, until at last the cry was heard,
1910 the cliffs of Geatland grown visible, counted,
claimed, and the ship sang out for the final
push, thrusting herself at the shore,
shoving keel at country.
Iheir harbor-watcher was already running
waiting as he'd been for days, eyes peeled
for the return of his tribe. He tugged
anchor cables, moored the ship to sand,
neaving her against the current to keep
the waves from seducing her again. He ordered
1920 that the holds be emptied, gold and gems,
all stores and hoards straight to shore.
After that it was only a hop-skip to Hygelac,
Hrethel's heir, and the gold would go his wav,
up the cliff to king and company.
The building was brilllant, the king imposi
83
enthroned in his home-hall. Hygd, his queen,
was young but shrewd. Though she'd only
overwintered recently in the realm, Hæreth's daughter
knew her duty: open heart met open hands when it came
1930 to Geats. She paid attention, made trenchant thrift
feel more generous than lessers' over-gifts.
Nothing like Modthryth, oh shit, remember her?
The people's princess, an utter criminal.
Bro, if anyone even looked at her in daylight,
save her own overlord, she'd deal that man death
order him bound, each shackle tightened to torture,
his sentence resounding from on high: sword-selection,
then the entertainment, a public flaying, arteries spurting
gore, good riddance. She may have been beautiful,
1940 she may have been royal, but can we agree here?
Why the brutality?! Pretty peace-weavers aren't meant
to claw, bringing good men down just for looking.
innocent oglers sent deathward. Talk about inflated offenses!
Right. Then Hemming's son became Modthryth's husband,
and she shifted mysteriously. Drinkers spilt a different song
a bathroom-wall graffiti-shrift. Marriage mellowed
the monster. She sea-changed when she was Offa's wife.
Everyone liked her better. Her father had traded her,
hauled her onto a ship, dowry-gowned, conveyed her
1950 from her homeland to other shores. Her nature
changed when she got free of her family.
84
She became queenly; betore she'd been the worst.
She sat on her new throne, famed for kindness,
lovalty, devotion to her king. And him? Bro, obviously
he was the best, a king among kings, and moreover,
the greatest man who ever lived, if that's not overkill,
so it's no wonder she learned morals under his hand,
Offa's honored wife, as he ruled over his lands.
From that duo, as proof, if needed, came a good son,
1960 Eomer, grandson of Garmund, Hemming's kinsman,
well-met to all warriors, reliable in combat,
and a keeper of comrades.
Back to Beowulf, a hero himself, marching with his men
across the sand, crossing the sprawling strand,
the tidal flats and salted shores, making haste
beneath brightness as the sky-candle shone hard
from the south. They hurried blur-fast overland
to where, rumor had it, their youthful king,
killer of Ongentheow, protector of his own clans,
1970 was handing out booty in his honored hall.
That Beowulf was back, was shouted man to man,
so Hygelac knew it, even as his warrior made his way
through the gates and into the hall, war-kin to the king
and killer captain, well and willing.
85
The hall was cleared and the king awaiting,
as our boy and his horde marched in.
Hygelac greeted his warrior in formal speech,
then sat down head-to-head with him,
ready to compare notes with his returning
1980 boatman-brother. Hæreth's daughter wafted wifely
through the hall, mead-jug held in her hands,
caring for the companions, pouring a waterfall
into cups as warriors held them high. Only then
did Hygelac begin to question his comrade, calmly,
commandingly, to glean the story of the war-Geats,
and take the tale for his own hall-history.
"Holy hell, Beowulf, how'd it go out there?
You left with hardly a word, and hied yourself
overwater to defenda hall not your home: Heorot.
1990 And Hrothgar? Did you help him? We know his woes,
and to be honest, I thought them insoluble.
I've been mourning you in advance, dreading news
of your death. As you may recall, I begged you
to let the Danes do their own damn dirty work.
Ir's them who began a blood feud with Grendel,
and them who should end it. Wel, thank God
you're home, whatever horror
happened at Heorot."
86
Beowulf, descendant of Ecgtheow, began:
2000 "I'm surprised you haven't heard what went down,
Hygelac. It was proud; already written
into poems. Grendel and I slammed each other
in the very hall he'd been harrowing, murdering
medal-Scyldings, ripping hearts from their holds,
all of which, not to jump ahead, he got whipped
into eternity for. Grendel will never have a single son
to brag on his daddy's battles, to tell the tale
of our night-fight, no matter whether any of his
awful line manage to live through a shifting
2010 civilization. Lemme lay it out now.
When I got to Denmark, I sped to Hrothgar's hall
and presented myself, giving cred and clan.
Once he knew who I was, and what I'd come to do,
he stationed me on a bench between his own sons
and threwa raucous feast for me. I've never seen
any company drunker or more delighted.
More mead, men!' The queen herself came through.
that pretty peace-pleader, and gave out gifts
to bolster courage-a war-torc for this warrior
2020 before she snuggled up beside the king.
Hrothgar's daughter, too, made the rounds,
bringing beer to the highest rank, all plank-arranged.
Freawaru!' they called, and she circled the room
ering up a studded cup. That bangle-bedecked beautyv
87
is betrothed to Froda's The bereaved son, Ingeld. Scyldings' king chose him for her husband, Hrothgar hoping, kingdom-keeper that he is, that sending his precious daughter to fuck his foe's son will fix the fatherly feud: heal bitter hearts and bandage 2030 weeping wounds. But spears seldom sleep for long when a ruler's fallen, no matter how perfect the princess.
"We can predict how the Heotho-Bards will react, every loyal thane there. All will go well, until after the wedding, when the young lord stands to dance, and dips his Danish bride, her body dripping in a dark dowry, ancient garnets bought in blood from the Heotho-Bards themselves, sparkling stones stripped from beloved ghosts, ring-mail wrought by their own ancestors, cherished heirlooms
2040 returning home as Danish dazzle, uncredited.
An aged uncle, already drunk, swaying, will shout:
Let's have a toast!'
His eyes will focus on rings well known to him,
triggering black thoughts of massacre, all that killing,
all those spirits, suddenly filling the hall. Heart pounding,
he'll sound the sorrows of his people, begin to prick
the prince's conscience, seeking to stir him.
"To our host! And to the sword his father carried
in his final battle! Don't tell me you don't recognize
88
0the prime iron he died swinging.
that day he fought
the Danes. Let me
refresh your memory, boy
The day Withergyld was
murdered, and our heroes fell
to folly, the day the Scyldings shook the field down,
scavenging our dead. Now who wears your
father's armor?
Some assassin's son, walking into our home-hall,
shaking sword and status, boasting that he owns us,
weighted with the wonders you
should yourself be wearing.
"He won't stop, but will keep pressing,
raising the temperature of the room,
2060 until one of the Danish lady's thanes is slain,
streaked with crimson, killed for Danish deeds,
his slayer sprinting out alive, into home territory.
This will begin it all again. Both sides, vow-bound,
will break, old thirsts unslaked, a rage rising in Ingeld,
his love for Freawaru frozen, comforts gone to curses.
That's all just to say, sidebar, that the Heotho-Bards
aren't to be trusted, their faltering friendship with the Danes
bridged only by a bride.
"Now, my main man, let me get back to Grendel
2070 the story of our clash and crash, everything
that happened when we two went hand to hand,
After Heaven's gem slipped smoothly down to soil.
he arrived: that froth-fanged foulness,
89
that twilight-tormentor, come to attack us
as we gathered in silent safety in Heorot.
There, Handsceoh was fated to fall,
torn from his life, first-cursed on this quest.
Our beloved brother was beaten and eaten,
his gory grave Grendel's gullet. Lemme be clear
2080 Grendel ate him up. The attacker's teeth
were bloody, his face strewn with gobbets,
his body swollen with evil, and still
he wasn't finished feasting, but insisted
on leaving the golden hall with more harvest.
Grendel was famous for his heft: he extended hands,
then, for none other than your boy. He had a huge sack
hanging from his shoulder, stitched with sinew,
clasped with clever workings, crafted of twisted
dragon skins. Grendel knew nothing of us,
2090 but this wrath-wanderer wanted to stuff
Beowulf and his boys into that sack, abduct us.
That shit wasn't happening. The moment I stood
to face him, my rage evident, Grendel was a goner.
rd be talking too long ifI got into every detail
of the battle, how I paid him in pain for wrongs
done to Danes. Suffice it to say, I won you honor,
my king, and the Geats as well. Even though Grendel
got loose and lived, suckling at survival's sweetness
90
a little longer, his right arm stayed in Heorot
10 holding the door, amputated, and he limped,
anguished, to the mere, where he dove
and drowned in despair.
The Dane-lord rewarded me for my life-risking
with piles of gold and heaps of heirlooms,
once the sun was up. All of us at table,
primed for entertainment-singers and story-slingers.
An ancient Scylding, steeped in the history of
his people, told tales of the early days.
Sometimes one of the men touched harpstrings,
2110 recounting his life story, and other times the king himself
offered up an awesome riff, while in turn the grimmest
among us, scarred and wizened, would hobble up to tell
of boyhood battles, then shift to songs of old age,
overcome by emotion, silvered heart aching
for the good old golden days.
"We reveled indoors for hours, joyful and united,
until nightfall came stalking us, a shadowy reaper.
Uninvited, she appeared, a dame made of dama ge
Grendel's mother slinking out of dark, formatted for furv.
2120 avenging her son and Dringing ruin back to the room
Cief and death-theft had possessed her, and she can ie
G
91
to find the Geats who'd found her Grendel. She marched
for blood, a rebel warrior entering private premises, and
captured
a counselor, Æschere, the king's closest and wisest.
In the morning, there was no body to burn, no corpse,
nothing at all to call back his memory in smoke,
nor limbs to light for love. She'd borne his flesh away
and hidden it in the darkness under the mountain
and rushing waters, her mere-morgue.
2130 Hrothgar was broken by this blow, worse than any other,
his scars reopened by razors. The king begged me
yes, begged, and he named you, too-to go after her,
to pursue her underwater to avenge his loss,
and ifI did it, to gain even greater glory. He named his price,
and it was done. Into icy waters I went, diving deep to meet
my match, and found her, raging. I took her and she took me, too,
hand to hand, woman to man, water roaring red,
splitting the current with color, until at last, in her own hall,
I beheaded Grendel's mother with a sword too substantial
2140 for anyone else's swing. I barely left with my life, and only that
by Fate's choice, but when I returned to the surface,
Halfdane's heir, bearer of men, gave me a stocked store
of his own hoard, gifts golden and godly.
Thus Hrothgar acted as ever he has, paying me
for my sacrifice and more, letting me set my wages
92
in goblets and goods. From Hrothgar's heirlooms
comes Hygelac's inheritance. I've brought these gifts
to you, your majesty, and I give them willingly.
You're the man I seek to impress.
2150 I've got no other family left, none close.
Your kindness is my comfort."
Beowulf called for the boar's head standard, the battle-crested
helmet, the grizzled gray mail-shirt, and the ferocious
war-sword,
and wrought an account of their provenance.
"When Hrothgar gave me all these precious things,
brilliant leader, he bade me bring you words as well,
to explain why theyre favors fit for kings.
He told me this had belonged to his older brother,
King Heorogar, but he'd kept it locked away,
2160 never giving it over to inheritance, not even to
his son Heoroweard, despite his worthiness,
despite his loyalty. Now it's yours to bear in health!"
Bro, here's what I know: tour horses were brought in next,
presented to the king. Beowulf bestowed those bays,
along with their armor, each one an impossible gift
of blood and girth. This is how it should be between
birth-kin, no plots, no plans for plunder,
93
no conspirers crafting catastrophe, no one
sculpting death where life should be.
2170 The warrior-king, Beowulf's uncle, was lucky
to have the loyalty of his nephew, and he carried
Beowulf's burdens in return.
I heard Beowulf brought Hygd the golden torc
gifted him by Wealhtheow, and with it, three horses
harnessed similarly in gold, sleek and graceful. The queen
wore her reins well, her breast radiant with heroic history.
Thus did Beowulf bring his bravery to bear
he'd battled like a brawler, but could hold court
with kings and queens, too, never punching down,
2180 never mocking drunk comrades, never locking himself
in combat with those whose strength couldn't stand.
He kept his stones controlled, and when he rolled,
he rolled only with equals. Mind, he hadn't had this status
when he left, a boy who men looked on as lowthe
Geats thought him lazy, and even their lord
had never given him span on the beer-bench, believing
he was all bluster, no badass, thinking his position came
from privilege, not class. But now? Everyone who'd thought
Beowulf was just a wayward boy got taught.
94
10 The king, war-bringer, protector of men, ordered
Hrethel's heirloom brought in, and that splendid
sword, gem-clotted, the best by far in the treasury,
he lay in Beowulf's lap. Then more! He gave
his man seven thousand hides of land,
and a hall of his own, into which he could
place his throne. They both already had land
from their fathers, ancestral sway, but now,
a better way: land came from Hygelac
to his new right hand, Beowulf.
2200 Later days were cloudier. A war began.
Hygelac was dead by then, his shield yielding
no safety for his son, Heardred, against the war-wired
Scylfings, who patrolled, hunting for the young Geat-king.
They found him surrounded by his soldiers, slew them,
and after that, boys--well, you know.
The rings rolled down to Beowulf. He caught the kingdom
he'd rejected, and held tight to it for fifty winters,
before he, too, found himself an old man,
the gray guardian of Geatland.
2210 Across a star-studded sky, in deepest dark one niaht
a dragon ranged, unchecked. She was a scar-skinned
95
warrior, long accustomed to shadow-soaring by moonlight,
defending her claim, hoarding in her own high hall.
No man knew the way into the dragon's cliff-top cocoon,
but a thief stumbled through a split in the stone,
and retrieved a gem-glistering goblet. He robbed
her of nothing else, just the cup-but.
Up she rose, raging, grieving, though to cry out
was to confess she'd been stripped while sleeping.
2220 This country, these creatures, would feel her fire.
The instigator hadn't intended to ignite Armageddon;
he'd merely slunk into a cave, and found a crypt. This slave,
seeking safety from a miserly master, became the spark
that smoked a primeval monarch out. He spelunked into
yawning dark,
and gripped a wall. Instead of clammy stone, he felt a kiln;
instead of granite, gold. Whose forbidden hold was this?
What had he provoked? He wrapped trembling fingers around
the first smal, shining thing he found, and fled. For the vault
was more than a treasury: piles of preciouses nested
2230 beneath the coils of a snoring serpent. It was a bed.
Bro, no one living knows the name of the lost soul
who'd interred those spoils long ag0, burying the grave
goods ofa wealthy race. Death had snatched them all
into a sack and lifted them out of existence, leavine
96
only one, this ghost-custodian, mourning
over friends, family, foes alike. He had no future
for himself in mind, nothing but a dead end.
Left with only this haul of tomb-treasure,
nothing to spend it on, no joys left to consume,
2240 he attempted to wring pleasure from his stint
as the richest man alive. There was a barrow
already built, high on a headland above the sand,
secured by waves against trespass. The last man
climbed the slope, carrying his collection, all the things
worth saving, all the wonders he could find. He
organized the bounty, performing final rites.
"Hold these, Mother Earth. Men have lost
their grip. We mined this metal from you,
forged it for fighting, ruined ourselves warring
2250 against one another. Man by man, we gave our souls
over to spite, lives flashing before our eyes, farewells
to all our hopes. I'm alone here now, no sword-bearer,
no cup-keeper, no hall-sweeper. My flock's
flown south without me. Ihis hard helmet will lose
its filigree-there's no polisher waiting
to keep our
battle-masks gleaming. Evervon
once waking now dreams. 1his breastplate
endured many battles-bruised by blades, smashed
lds-now it'll be red dust, by s along with its owner.
97
2260 Metal shells rest here without their warriors.
Now there are no heroes, no soothing music,
no harp, no hawk soaring through hall,
no swift horses trampling green grass.
We existed; now we're extinct."
And so the last survivor mourned, making his way
from emptiness to emptiness, listing his sins one by one,
wandering the world woefully, until death came
welling in, to wash him from the rocks.
Afterward, an ancient collector soaring through
2270 the starry hours happened past, and saw a golden
glyph from above. A flame-tongued one who sought
out strongholds as she scourged, a slip-skinned dragon,
tagging the sky with flaming sigils. Farmers kept vigil,
dreading her smoky signs. She was hungry for hoards,
tempted by temples, and every burial site
was known by her to hold heathen hopes,
howling for a new owner.
There she dwelt, this nameless fear, for three hundred vears.
padlocking her hall with all her limbs until the infiltrator
m
2280 infuriated her. That slave skittered to the owner's hom
with the stolen goblet, and gifted it to get mercy.
Thus, the hold of the old gold-get was known,
98
her vault cataloged, her ring-hoard wrung.
For the master clocked what he was looking at,
a treasure protected by time.
At once, the dragon woke, choking on fury.
She huffed her hoard, winding herself around it,
revulsion kindling within her, the sour scent
of an enemy man, the footprints of a plunderer,
2290 who'd blundered past her sleeping skull and seen
her secret dreaming-place. We all know stories
like this one: a man unmarked by Fate may sometimes
cloak himself in God's grace, passing close to monsters,
unbeheld. The hoard-holder fine-toothed the ground,
fire-foraging for the man who'd invaded her bedchamber.
Wide she circled, planning his disemboweling,
claw-mapping every inch of wilderness,
though no man there to capture. She imagined
a wild battle, flexed rapturously, then undulated
300 into her lair to hunt again for the missing cup,
only to rediscover the telltale evidence
someone had desecrated her delights.
Teeth gritted, she ticked until nightfall,
that guardian of old gold and haunted history
her urge toward murder more intense by the moment.
Eventually,
ecstatic, she outlasted the ght.
Into darkness she emerged and put the world on blast,
99
roaring into the sky, a comet of catastrophe.
Villagers in the vicinity felt her attack first,
2310 their lands blackened, but soon it would be their
lord and treasure-giver suffering.
The dragon swooped low and spat flame, destroying
both manor and hovel, scrawling red RSVPs in the sky.
The winged wringer had no time for survivors. She skywrote
her grievances, then rewrote them roughly in land-fire
from end to end of Geat-realm, her scaly helmn
shining as she sang insults from the clouds.
Back to her ridge she whipped as the sun showed itself,
slithering into her gold-stock, locking herself away.
2320 She'd exhaled upon their ground, and now they burned,
black blood, bah! She slept, trusting in human frailty
to keep her lair unmolested. That trust would turn
to dust, like everything.
Soon Beowulf received a blistering missive.
His own hall, his heart-home, had combusted.
He'd been ghost-throned by the skyborne gold-holder.
To the good man, this region's ring-giver, this was
distress unbearable--punishment, perhaps, from the Lord.
Unjust? He worried, weighed it: Had he broken
2330 old covenants? Unwarded his soul? Doubt dawned
100
as he considered deeds long done, sins kept secret.
He wasn't used to feeling insecure.
Meanwhile, the firedrake raked coast-to-coast
with claws, charred gilded Geatland without pause,
crimson blazes and black billows, until
the old war-king woke to action, plotting vengeance
on the stranger. The foremost warrior projected
for his own protection a myth-worthy shield,
made entirely of iron. He knew no forest-gift
2340 could defend him; his safety lay in smithy.
Linden couldn't withstand lightning. Though Beowulf
didn't predict he' d die in this fight, he and the dragon both,
he'd always known that Fate could fuck a fighter up,
no matter the hoards he'd held, no matter the luck he'd had.
The ring-collector was too proud to bring a war-band,
to march an army against the firmament-flier.
His plan would be his pyre-he imagined the dragon
a dimwit, clocking neither her courage nor her grit.
I mean, he had, for years, been up in it,
2350 persevering through pain and danger,
countless grim battles since he'd saved
Hrothgar and Heorot, since he'd rushed
Grendel and all his kin, knocking that
101
damned family to the mat. One of the of those hand-to-hand worst hells had been the one when Hygelac, Geat-king, closest comrade, perished in Friesland. His skin became sheath for a sword, his skull a cup overflowing with blood. Beowulf saved himself
2360 only by swimming, fleeing the massacre
by sea, bearing back as he swam thirty suits
of armor torn from corpses he'd created.
The Hetware had no joy of him, hiding their heads beneath their own splintering linden, as Beowulf
ground them into cold sand.
Few saw home again.
Solitary, salt-scourged, he swam screaming
over open ocean, Ecgtheow's son repatriating
grief-stricken to his homeland. Hygd tried
2370 to quicken him with the throne, offering him gold,
gemstones, a potent position, a life less lonely.
Her own son she didn't trust to govern,
to keep borders trussed against deploying hordes,
now his daddy was dead. She couldn't convince
Beowulf to step over Heardred, nor consent
to come to her bed, but instead he offered
his counsel to the boy-king, until he was
man enough to rule the Weder-Geats himself.
102
Soon thereafter, exiles appeared over the salt-highway,
80 Ohthere's sons, who'd raised a coup against their
old wave-king, Onela. He was the ruler of the
Scylfings, had given gold from his kingdom seat,
was master of their mead-hall. Heedless, Heardred
received the refugees, and traded his life for it,
his reception repaid in regrets. A fatal flash of Onela's sword,
and Hygelac's line was ended. The Swede-king, satisfied,
set off to the briny boulevard, and Beowulf, bereaved,
ascended the Geat-throne, in grief, never surrendering
his reluctance to become the ruler.
2390 That was a good king.
In later days, our man paid the killers in kills,
avenging his dead prince by befriending Eadgils,
the last of the Swedish rebel sons. Beowulf sent him
an army of seaborne swords, and tied a scarlet ribbon
around the blood feud, exterminating Onela.
And so, Ecgtheow's heir inherited a complement of king's
qualifiers, dangers rare, treasures tragic, constant proofs
of courage, excelling at every impossibility,
until the day came for him to kill the dragon.
103
79
2400 The Geat-king rode with eleven companions,
firing himself into fury as he hunted the lair's location,
By then he'd found the smoking gun, the embezzlement
that'd stoked the dragon's rage. The gilt cup had been
brought to him by the burglar who'd begun this,
and that thief, on life-tilt, became the thirteenth man,
rife with regrets, compelled to guide an expedition
back to the scene of his crime. The unwilling guest
of the king led the rest, in safety of daylight,
to the hide he'd strayed into, a golden grave
2410 near salt shoals and trembling tides. Piled
inside, like scales, were mounds
of etched metal, detailed by the dead,
along with a veteran guardian,
who now never slept. She was the
sole barrier to entry, but burrowed beneath
the earth as she was, there was no simple way
to bring death to her den.
The old king fell to his knees on the cliff point
and willed good fortune upon the Geats he'd ruled,
2420 those who'd sat fireside, warmed by his gold.
Stricken, suddenly unsteady, he foresaw his fate
in the fog, shrouded but certain. For a moment,
he felt for his old foes, fen-bound, embarking alone.
104
Soon, soon, his own lease would expire,
evicting him from hall, hearth, and home.
Beowulf, Ecgtheow's own son, manned up,
mastered himself, said it straight:
"I lived whole lives in my youth, endless combat,
great wars. I remember every moment, even now.
2430 When I was seven, my father sent me out to sleep
in the king's house. He dropped me on a new daddy,
King Hrethel, who kept me safe, opened his hands,
treated me, a fosterling, like his own sons.
Never was I less dear to him than Herebeald,
or Hæthcyn, or even my best-beloved Hygelac.
The eldest, Herebeald, tumbled into an early grave,
done in by his brother: Hæthcyn tugged his bone-bow,
flinging a missile that missed the mark,
shark-toothed his sibling's heart, a bloody thorn.
2440 There was no way to mourn for him, no vengeance
to be had, for what could mitigate the blame?
Who was left to shame for this
heart-thieving? Nobody.
It's the same sort of sorrow when a man outlives
his son, sees him climb the gallows and swing,
sentenced, justly, for crimes against the king.
105
The father hollers out a sob to rapturing ravens,
witnesses his boy swallowing dust, unable to plead
his case. No settlement in silver can buy a child back
2450 from the gods of air. The father awakens disgraced,
in despair thereafter, knowing his inheritor's been
erased. He has no verve, no urge to visit beds,
no wish to father a new son, now his firstborn's dead.
He stares in sorrow at his child's empty room, hears
the dreary wind that habits there now. His hall is silent,
cheerless, hungry, hearth without coals, riders sagging
in their saddles, heroes hidden, where once singers sang
and harps were fingered, where a yardful of sons were brothers.
Abandoned on Earth, left to live alone, with only sins
2460 to number, the gray king retreats to slumber, moaning dirges.
What son? What wife? What life? What song?
This was Hrethel, after Herebeald was dead.
He couldn't bait the killer with blood-feud rules,
nor hate him for his wrongs. The murderer
was not his preferred son, but still, he was next
in the now blot-blurred line. Hrethel walked away
from the world, losing the plot, heart-tortured,
stone-faced. He marched alone into the flickering
light of God, leaving what he had left to leave:
2470 bones, strongholds, and cold sod to his sons,
as a rich man must.
106
"That old man was dust, but his old wars
remained. Swedes and Geats got in
each other's faces, and fought ferociously;
Hrethel dead, dark desires rising. Ongentheow's sons
banded together, full of war-wrath. On and on
they came, keeping no peace from overseas,
but twisting knives and words into ambush at
the hill of Hreosas. My own killer-kin avenged that,
480 sing it with me, you all know the story, but there
was a cost: we lost Haæthcyn, Geat-lord,
in that bloodbath, and Hygelac,
my own Hygelac, drew his sword
the next morning. He brought it down
on Ongentheow, his brother's slayer,
splitting his helmet, sending the old Swede
to his death, drained, the dirt drinking his blood.
Even his leathern fists, feud-fortified,
failed in fending off his fate.
2490 And me? I fought to repay the rings Hygelac
gave me,
sword swift, debts edited in red.
He gave
me greensward, rolling hills, a home of my own.
He had no need to seek any superhero among
or Spear-Da no hired nerc
the always there, his constant
Gifthas,
Swedes, or Spearto
secure
his six. I was al
107
companion, marching ahead, first to charge.
I was the soldier who kept my king shredding,
the warrior who kept his queen wed. I was his man, until_
Well. I'm not dead yet. I'll lead while taking
2500 my last breath, as long as this sword stands by, even if
I have to end with death. It's been my second in every battle
since the very beginning, when I slew Dæghrefn,
the Hugas warrior, in a duel before both our armies.
He brought no hoard back to his ring-lord, that flag-waver,
but instead fell bravely, not to my blade, but to my boldness.
I wrung that man to death, my fists deep in his rib cage,
my hands in his lungs, his bone-vault broken.
Now I'll use all I have-sword, fists, sharpened edge,
honed heart-to engage the snake for this gold-heap."
2510 Beowulf blasted his last boast:
"I laid my life down on the daily when I was your age.
Now, gray guardian though I am, r'll show you
how it's done. I'll kill this creature if it's the last thing
I do. If it's no coward, it'll come out of its cave
and face its challenger.
He eyeballed each of his men, power-privileged
warriors, for the last time:
"Td go in without weapons, as I always have,
if this weren't a dragon. I'd do it like a man, kill it
108
harehanded, like I killed Grendel so long ago.
But mortal skin can't contend with a flame-spitting fiend,
and so I go in sword-armed, taking shield and mail-shirt.
I won't surrender when I see the beast, but fight it by the wall,
and God will dictate which brawler wins. Get a good seat, boys,
and look to the sky: your job's to watch this flier fall.
Im decided, don't defy me. I've no more shade
to throw on this serpent-raider. Let the winner win,
let the loser get bent. My men, stay here
atop the barrow. Wait with your war-weapons.
2530 Watch and see who wins-who can suffer more,
who can be worse wounded, who can survive fire.
This is my fight. I don't ask for intervention
none of you are strong enough to take this thing,
to try to stake your manhood on doing a dragon.
Ill be the one winning the gold, my bravery
the broadest, and if not, boys, this'll be
the battle that breaks your king."
Beowulf stood tall, his iron shield upraised, armored
in his own fame, his helmet, his mail-shirt, his faith
firm only in Fate, a grit-god bearing brute weight,
beneath the rocky ledge. No trembling in his hands, but
a strong
salute. He'd survived worse than this, a veteran
of foreign wars, of battle-betrayals, of heartbreak, flung
himself from cliffs over and over, surfaced singing.
109
There: a stone arch, and there a stream rushing from
the barrow's entry, a boiling geyser, furious fumes
and flames. No one could live long in there, not
without burning. Beowulf knew he couldn't fight
inside the hoard-lair. The dragon's heat was horrific.
2550 He worked his wrath into a roar. The main man of the
Weder-Geats bellowed into the blast zone, calling forth
his foe. Under the stone, warmth turned to war
an echoed challenge bounced, and the dozing dragon
lifted her head, alert with fury. A human voice!
Thered be no negotiation, no settlement in metal.
Fire walked first, dragon's breath surging
out of the stones. Earth quaked as she rose
and roared in return. The challenging mortal
raised his shield as she emerged, a whipping wraith,
2560 a coil convulsing overhead, fangs, claws, and scales
railing against robbery, ready for war.
Beowulf's sword was already drawn, that razor edge,
that razing heirloom. Each of them, living, was
intolerable to the other, and in fury, they fell to it.
Feet planted, the people's provider held firnm
behind his shield, even as the serpent swirled.
twisting and unfurling, her scales flame-swathed
,
110
finging herself hard at Fate, a flexing firewoork
aimed straight at the king. His shield shirked
70 its duty, keeping him safe for only moments.
The famous warrior was, for the first time, naked.
Another first: Beowulf had never before been quarry,
God-snubbed, Fate-forsaken, his glorious, premeditated
victory unwritten. The Geat-lord raised a sooty fist
and punched in panic at armored scales, as his sword
slid, twisting against stony bones, his fang useless
against volcanic dangers. It dawned on the king
that he was afraid, his weapons forged without sorcery,
his defenses all man-made. The hoard-guard rippled
2580 in rage, her mouth a fusillade of flames, so furious
was she to feel even the dullest blade. Her war-lanterns
lit. Beowulf knew better than to expect victory.
His sword, unmatched until this hour, splintered
where it should've slain. His ageless iron
had never been conquered, but now?
Ecgtheow's son found himself engaged in ebbing:
loaded into a rattling cart and exiled
to a darker country, though unwilling
to go easy
in the loss of long-held lodging,
2590
Everybody's
gotta learn sometime.
Back at it again, the two battled furiousllvy..
the dragon
renewed, rapturous, inhaling,
111
uncoiling afresh. The man who'd been king
was wreathed in flame; he knew his end was near.
No one was coming, no seconds running to serve
or save him, no ring-raised warriors-those men,
that former family, were sprinting from his screams,
racing for safety, off the barrow and into the trees.
But one man felt something, a bond that bound him
2600 back. He was kin and could not leave his king
to die alone. His name was Wiglaf, and he was
Weohstan's son, that righteous warrior,
that Scylfing kinsman of Ælfhere.
Wiglaf watched his king writhe beneath
the heat of his flame-battered helmet,
remembering the rings that king had given him,
his comfortable home among the Wægmundings,
his halcyon holdings and heritage, come down
from his daddy. He could not run with the rest.
2610 He raised his linden shield and lifted his sword,
a blade with lineage of its own, a weapon come
from Eadmund, Ohthere's son, that exiled,
friendless one that Weohstan had killed
in combat. He'd borne his victim's arms
back to the dead man's kin: his engraved
helmet, woven chain mail, and sword,
112
gjant-forged. Onela returned the gear,
ring-gift to a kin-killer, though slain Eadmund
had been his nephew. Weohstan held the hostile hoard
260 for the rest of his life, helm, sword, shirt,
until his son came of age and needed metal1
to prove his worth. When he was dying,
gray and aged, embarking into the unknown,
he showered Wiglaf in battle-bounty,
Geat-witnessed. Now was the young warrior's
first chance to align himself with his lineage, to fight for his father and for his He had a ring-lord. strong spirit, and his inheritance Was sharp as ever, a thing the serpent would learn, 2630 when soon they met.
Repulsed at their reluctance, Wiglaf sought to convince his companions: "Brol Listen! Remember in the mead-hall, we swore to our lord we' d stand by him, SWore to our ring-giver we were worth his investment? That we'd bleed in our battle-gear. given us for fighting, not strutting? He favored us from among the flock,
gave us gifts, called us more than just mill-run 2640 warriors. I know he insisted he climb this hill alone, the head of our country
113
the best of men, but it's time for us to defy him
Get in the zone. He's falling!
Do we watch him drop? No! Do we wait
for his heart to stop, for him to die? No!
Beowulf needs backup! On attack!
Let's save our savior from those flames!
rd rather burn in a pyre alongside my ring-giver
than run home, arms untested against any enemy.
2650 My God, hear me!
It beggars belief that we wouldn't
even seek to slay this serpent, that we
wouldn't try to tear our prince from its teeth.
Men, I know, if you don't, he deserves better
than dragonfire, undefended
by his own. We're sworn to go together!
No? Well? Then >'m going in alone,
though my sword's nothing next to its skin.
r'll bring my king my shield, helmet,
2660 shirt, and sword."
He sprinted through fire, appearing armored
alongside his lord, shouting:
"Beowulf, I'm beside you! You'll dare to risk it all,
and fight to the finish, as you did when you were young.
You won't be bested while your heart beats!
Your fame won't diminish! Your history's here!
114
Be strong, my king! Your boy's with you in this fight.
Be your country's shield, as I battle on your right."
The dragon stanched any imminent surrender in herself.
2670 Her wrath rekindled, her own unearthly serpent song.
She brought forth fire, blasting it at those nuisance
humans, filthy, false-scaled, and intrusive.
She scintillated sword and shield, flash-burning
Wiglaf's lindenwood to ash.
His mail-shirt was like linen to her, so he ducked
under his kinsman's shield, still fighting. His king
shared that steel umbrella, once the young warrior
stood beside him, showered in sparks. Invigorated
by the thought of victory, the king used all his strength
2680 to strike, lunging at possibility. Nægling was the victim
of the swing, snapping like a straw. Beowulf's
blood-tested blade was wrecked by dragon skin.
It was not our man's wyrd to be assisted by sword,
no, not by sharp edges, nor ancient iron, and his
gray blade gave way under too strong
a swing. shattered by too straight a stroke.
Beowulf got no win from that weapon.
The third round sounded. The fire-breather
rallied, rocketing from her corner, and diving
115
2690 at that warrior, driving needle-fangs into his throat
shaking him like a captured flag. Beowulf
went limp, his body wound-worn,
drenched in his own dark lifeblood.
Here's what I know: Wiglaf, Weohstan's son
saw his king collapsing, and showed his bloodline's
bravery and Geat-born grit. His fighting hand
was singed as he dodged the dragon's head,
but he drove lower, spurning safety to spit
the serpent's stomach with his ogre-etched sword.
2700 With that blade in her belly, she couldn't belch flame.
Her fires sputtered. Now Beowulf, with his last strength,
drew a dagger from his hip, a lethal hunting thorn,
and dipped it into the dragon's side, wounding her fatally: blade met body, a bleak and bitter fight.
Together, these two slew their foe, courage conquering
flight, and that duo, kin by blood and bone, didit
side by side. Every warrior should step up to serve
his lord, throw down regardless of odds.
This was the last battle for the king, though,
2710 his final victory a grim one.
The old warrior's wounds wept the dragon's legacy:
scalding spit set by poisoned fangs, seething into sepsis.
116
Baenow ulf knew he was a goner. His chest heaved
with each heartbeat. He slumped against the wall,
doomed but dignified, admitting defeat,
easing his broken body down.
He fixed his eyes on the stone of the hall:
arches curving over tall columns, worked in an age
before he'd lived, by giants long gone under.
2720 And his new battle-brother, better than any of those others,
hand-washed his king's wounds, serving sweetness
even in this sorry state, unhelming him,
bathing him, bringing him peace.
Beowulf spoke, mortally wounded. Despite the doom
diminishing his light, he unlocked his word-vault. His time
was waning. His brain was all he had left; in it, an ultimate
ring-gift to bequeath. Death drew close and knelt beside him.
"IfTd ever had a son, I'd be giving him my armor now,
but I never fathered one, never gave my blood to an heir,
2730 and so this death is final. I'm the last of me.
I've been ruling here, fearless, for fifty winters.
I was the man. No neighbor came to war--my name
kept enemies at bay, and no one could scare me. I lived
in peace, and released my lease on battle, knowing
I had nothing to prove. I wasn't ambitious, never threw shade,
never took shit, never spat curses when I felt wronged,
117
but sat on the throne and weighed my people's woes
and wishes. I have to say, I did okay. Now, as I lie
dying, doomed by dragon, no one can claim I was a bad k 2740 God can't call me a murderer, forI slew none of my kin
My boy, get a move on, and bring your lord's last request. I want to see what prize I won of this. Wiglaf, go under
king
that stone, past where the dragon lies, wickedly wounded, her treasure targeted and taken. Climb into her hoard
and count my gold. Hurry. I want to hold it. I want to know what I did, to look at my winnings, my gilded gifts,
the grave-goods of a gone people. I want to know it was worth My dying will be easier ifI it. see what I died to do:
garner a giant's treasure in exchange for my life.
2750 I'l let go then, of all my holdings,
my throne, my carefully guarded bones."
Bro, here's how the story goes: Weohstan's son
went directly, obeying without question
the command of his dying king. Still dressed
in heavy vines of mail, he ran to bring his man
satisfaction, ducking below the stony ledge, into
the barrow. He was victorious, battle-brightened,
and saw with shining eyes a trove of hoarded
Heaven, riches beyond compare, tapestries, piles of gold
2760 heaping the floor. That old moon-splicing serpent's lair
118
rs for pouring goblets,
vas
full of ancient
pitchers
tor peace,
Was
cups,
corroding
without
women to offer them up.
Helmets
cups, corrodin,
rreedd with rust, artfully twisted
armbands without arms to hold
and oh, all that old gold, so long concealed, so long inviolate,
wriggling
back into the earth, despite the designs
of those who'd hidden it!
Wiglaf spied a standard, too, entirely woven of gold,
suspended on the wall over the rest, more delicately
wrought than any cloth he'd seen, glowing with illumination
2770 of its own, lighting the cave so he could inspect,
itemize the collection, imagine it emerging
The dragon was gone entirely, no sign she'd ever slept
there, done to death by dagger, and driven
into darkness. Then, so I'm told, that man plunged
his hands into the hold, that ancient hoard of giant's gold,
and fled his arms with feast-gifts, plates, goblets,
anything, everything his heart desired, taking also
the standard, dragging the dragon's lantern down
from the wall. I mean, bro, the dragon was dead,
2780 the old king's swing had made that certain
the one who'd guarded the glitz, who'd shown her love
by littering the land with abandoned homesteads
and burnt beds, who'd made midnight her inferno hour?
She'd been split into serpent skin.
119
Wiglaf made haste, driven by the treasure he carried
hoping his lord would still be living, though he'd been
forced to leave him high and dry. He returned,
arms full of bounty, to find his king bleeding out,
pools of red, letting go of life. Wiglaf fell to his knees
eak, 2790 to drip water on the king's lips. The old man tried to sDeat
and the knife-tip of a sentence stabbed from his locked
lung-vault. He stared at the gold, sorrowing.
To God, the King, Eternal Throne-Holder,
I sing my thanks. That You've let me look on this
before I die, this gold, this get? It's enough.
My people lose me, but gain a hoard-gift.
Say that on the day of my dying, I went hard.
Itraded my life for this. It's a good bargain.
My God, watch over my Geats. I'm going.
2800 These people are your people now. Shout
my last orders-tell my army to build a barrow
before my body blazes, one like the dragon had,
high up on the coast. I want it visible, towering
like a giant's tooth on Whales' Cape, so my people
know I was king, and so seafarers say my name
daily, nightly, call out Beowulf's Barrow!
120
as they pass in their tall ships, bound here
over wild and misty waters."
The king unlatched his heavy golden collar,
2810 handing it off to his young defender,
giving him also his ornate helmet and war-shirt,
instructing him to wear them wel.
"You're the end of the line, boy, the last standing
Wægmunding. Living has killed us all. We're dustbinned
by destiny. My courageous clan of noble men have gone
to ghost. Now I serve at their command."
Those were the warrior's last words. He had no more wisdom,
no more secrets, before he consigned himself to the pyre,
the final battle-fire for a body brutally broken. Beowulf's soul
2820 stepped from his breast to see what it could see.
It was agony for the would-be savior, so young, to see
his dear kinsman death-rattling on barren ground.
The dragon, that deep-dweller, lay dead as well, having done in
her enemy. She was limp and lifeless, her looping spine
and scales no longer lolling about piles of gold,
no longer ring-guarding. Keen-edged blades,
121
sC
sweat-hammered
and
fervently
filed, had bitten
her,
broken
her of soaring
flight, ended her
had adventures,
leaving
her stiff as a
shovel-split
2830
snake,
dead in dark dirt
beside
a gilded grave.
Never again
would she soar
through
a starry
sky, revel in rising rhapsody, rolling in and out
of clouds and mist, a raging rainbow, glinting golden
She plummeted,
Earth-struck,
blunted in blissful
brutality by Beowult. Hardly in history has there been
a man born, or so Im told, who, brawny and brave
as men may be, would be able to battle such a one,
to throw himself into her biting breath, or even creep
2840 into her lair for fortune's sake, and fearlessly find
the treasure-keeper there, her eyes open, a wonder-ward
The ancient hoard had changed ownership now, bought
by Beowulf's blood. Both he and his enemy had seen
the edge of existence, tripped and fallen over it.
It wasn't long before the forest-fled retainers
attempted to regain their status, those ten men
who'd run for the hills, abandoning their king
as the winged one was roaring in.
The cowards, who'd put their blades
2850 behind their backs when he'd needed
122
their strength, shambled out of the woods,
shields lifted, armor still on, to where the old king
lay collapsed. They found Wiglaf, crumpled beside him,
heartsick, his shoulder to the shoulder of his lord,
trying to wake him with water, but it was over.
There was no will left in Beowulf, no life-spark
to be ignited. God had decided, as He always does,
we all know it, and, bro, nobody changes God's mind.
The young warrior had words for them, though,
2860 terse words for the cowards who'd abandoned
their king. Wiglaf, Weohstan's son, spat severity
at the soldiers he'd found wanting.
"Anyone with half a brain's well aware that this king
treated us like princes, giving us gifts, the gear
that guards us even now. He opened his arms, offered all
who stood in his mead-hall armor: helmets, mail-shirts,
treasures. He treated us, his thanes, like sons, gave us
the glories he'd won, but, hey, I guess he had no judgment.
He threw those gifts away. What a fucking waste,
2870 in time of war, to armor and honor a corps of soldiers
who'd ignore him when he needed them most.
Our king had no cause to boast of his fight-family
he never saw them fight. God allotted him a blow,
he forced his blade into the fray, braver than all
123
of you put together. I couldn't keep him safe,
defending his flank, but God gave me strength
to swing and help him. At least I, alone among these
ranks, tried. My sword sank in, the enemy
was injured, the dragon's fire-oaths
2880 dimmed, her advances weaker, but I couldn't save him
Too few of you were loyal to our brave lord
in time of trouble. Well, kiss it all goodbye, boys,
those treasures you hoarded, those gifts,
those sparkling, unswung swords, the homes you held
by kindness of our king. That shit is gone.
Your families will founder. Your freeholds will fall,
the moment outland princes hear how you hid yourselves,
disgraced your king, and let him die undefended.
Are you warriors or weaklings?
2890 You should kill yourselves rather than live,
having dealt him this damage."
Wiglaf ordered that the battle's end be shouted out,
bad tidings brought to the men camped at the ridge,
retainers and unchosen warriors waiting heavyhearted
for reports. They'd spent the morning kneeling, nervous
for their beloved lord, expecting all and any outcomes:
king's death, or return of the king.
124
The messenger shouted truth, plainly, without hesitation.
The rider sped to the headland, forecasting for all to hear:
0"The people's prince, the Weders' lord and love,
the Geats' good gold-giver, is gone.
The king is dead. The dragon did him in,
but she's dead, too, stretched beside him,
an enemy slain by silver stabbing, a knife.
Beowulf's sword could not kill her, no matter
how he tried. Wiglaf is there now, with them both,
Weohstan's son, a survivor holding vigil for his dead,
a warriors' wake, for both the dear and the detested.
"Now. Listen up. War's coming for us,
2910 for this country. Soon our enemies will hear
our king's been killed. From sea to sea, everyone
from Franks to Frisians will mobilize.
Historic hatreds-the Franks have felt fury
since Hygelac led a flotilla of warships
into Friesland, though the Hetware held him there,
attacked him, and won with woeful odds.
Our leader, battle-dressed, was taken then,
his body falling, his army mourning.
He gave no winnings to his fighting force.
2920 The Merovingians haven't forgiven us.
125
"No kindness will come from the Swedes, either.
only vow-breaking, peace pacts poisoned.
Ongentheow, as everyone knows, slew Hæthcyn,
Hrethel's boy, at Ravenswood, back when the Geats
frst attacked the battle-Scylfings. Vengeance was swift
for the Geat attack. Ohthere's father was ferocious,
a seasoned, elder general, and he slashed that seafarer
Hethcyn, and repossessed his own wife,
mother to both Ohthere and Onela, who'd been kidnapped
2930 golden rings wrung from her fingers. Ongentheow
wasn't finished: he pursued his Geatish enemies,
driving them, panicked and bereft of their leader,
to Ravenswood, where he and his company
ran rings around the remnants,
reminding them how weak they were.
Through the black hours, he swore at them,
promising punishments, telling them
when the sun rose he' d shine his sword
on selected scalps, and string other soldiers
2940 from the gallows, make them treacle-sweets
for birds beaks. But at dawn,
when they were despairing.
they heard the horn of Hygelac,
126
and that hero came for them,
following their trail with troops.
"The Swedes and Geats battled and plowed
a bloody path, identifable for miles,
and no one, not even fools, could think them
finished fighting. The old man plotted murder,
2950 and made a move, retreating with his people.
Ongentheow knew higher ground would help him,
but he knew, too, that Hygelac was hard
famous for his fight skills. The old man
couldn't hold long against the sea-warriors,
not while keeping his wife, children, and followers safe.
He dammed them in behind sheltering walls,
but Hygelac's men breached them, pouring
into the sanctuary like floodwater, drowning
camp and confines. Ongentheow stood firm,
2960 gray and proud, but he was trapped, surrounded
by swords, and Eofor was appointed
the Swede-king's judge and jury.
Wulf, Wonred's son, rushed the old man
in rage, and struck him so that blood soaked
his hair. Still, he did not back down,
but raised his own sword, and hacked,
harder than he'd been hit. The Swede-king
127
spun and struck, fighting for his people.
Wonred's son couldn't take him,
2970 brave Wulfthough he was, and his blows
glanced off, until Ongentheow split his helmet
and forced him to flee, falling, head bloodied,
dazed though not dead. He was hurt, but he held,
and finally, his brother, Hygelac's loyal thane,
Eofor, lifted his own sword, an ancient piece
etched in ogre runes, and smashed it
into the old man's giant-forged helmet,
slashing past his shield. At last,
Ongentheow fell, the defender of his realm
2980 done and gone. Everyone ran to assist Wulf,
to bandage him, and carry him from the field,
now they were custodians of the bloody mud.
The walking warrior stripped Ongentheow
of his gear, his iron mail, his fierce sword,
his helmet, and ferried all this war-treasure
to Hygelac, who took the offering.
and said the giver would be repaid.
He told the truth, and for their courage,
Hrethel's heir, now king of Geats,
2990 gave Eofor and Wulf a hundred thousand
each in land-gifts and interlocked rings
of wealth to ratchet them up in status.
That was a good king.
128
None could critique his open hands.
He also gave over to Eofor
his only daughter, a bedmate
to bind him, a kin-bond
and vow of loyalty.
"So, to sum it up, the feud with the Swedes
3000 isn't over, and needs only this blood
to activate it again, a border-swarm,
a war walking into Geatland, the moment
they learn that Beowulf is gone. He's been
keeping us safe for decades, counting coffers,
battening the kingdom against invaders,
defending his citizens, and all the while
killing monsters, too. Come now, and hurry,
men, send him on his journey, pay him
our respects, and carry our king and ring-giver
3010 to his funerary rites. His pyre will be built
heaped with gold for melting, which he won
with his life. The death-hoard is too heavy
for our hearts, and it will be burned
along with him who won it. That gold
isn't for decorating followers, not for starring
he hosoms of young women, or latching in memory
nto loyal throats. No. Now is a time for mourning,
for walking downcast the exile's road,
129
gray-garbed and grim, for the king is dead, 3020 his song is silence, his laughter and entertainment forgotten. Take down your spears and touch
that dawn-chilled metal, raise them toward
a clouded world. No harp music will play to call warriors in, but instead we'll waken
to the raven, a rush of black how wings, telling in raw song she's watched the wolf and eagle worrying our dead, carrion-clawed, competing over the feast."
That was the end of the forecast, and the augur wasn't wrong. That messenger delivered it as evenly 3030 as such bad news can be delivered.
The troop was weeping, but they rose, and went in woeful rows to Eagles' Cape, where, on the cold sand, they found their king, soul long spent, that man who'd given them everything he had,
whose rings had warmed their hands.
It was the end of his epic, the climactic close,
and Beowulf, their warrior-king, died mighty.
They saw beside him a wrathful wonder,
a sky-dragon become ground-ghost. That
3040 flame-spitter, scourge of those coasts,
had been scathed and sooted by her own song She was fifty feet long, she who'd ruled
130
in
riving-rapture
over
their dreaming
hours,
diving
through
dawns to nest with her treasure.
their dreaming Now
Death had won her. The wyrm
would
no longer
writhe with coins, but with worms.
Beside her lay the dragon's dowry:
grave-good goblets and cups,
dishes and knives, rust devouring them now,
3050 though they'd spent a thousand winters
serving the ghosts of powerful men.
There was a spell on the hoard,
left by a skeleton tribe, a ward
that said no man could touch it
unless God, Glory-Dispenser and Hoarder
of Humanity, chose a hero and gave permission
for the treasures to disperse.
What had he hoped, the man who'd pressed
his people's precious things into a cave beneath
3060 the cape? All his keeping came to nothing.
First, the dragon killed the king, then the king
killed the dragon. Maybe a man's mighty,
maybe he's known to all as a warrior, but
Death has his number. No one knows
when it'l be called, when he'll have to walk backward
out of the beer-hall, exiled from life. So it was for Beowulf
when he sought battle in a barrow. Sure, the grave-guardian
131
was formidable, but our hero had no notion he was falling
out of Earth. The curse on that stony womb was set by men
3070 who'd impregnated it with treasure, claiming the confines theirs
until doomsday; if they couldn't possess them, no one could.
Any man who thieved was fated to perish, pushed
into pagan places, punished forever.
Beowulf never imagined gold could bring grief.
He forgot: not all gifts are for getting.
Wiglaf, Weohstan's son, took the floor:
"One man slipped down this slope, he alone deciding,
but we rest are roped to him: many will suffer
similar fates now. No counselor could convince
3080 our king, our old and beloved protector,
that he shouldn't come at the guardian of this gold,
but instead let her dream unmolested, drowsing
alongside her beloved hoard, ground-nested,
until world's end. Beowulfs fate was written, too.
He opened the barrow and showed us its bounty,
but he paid in blood and bone-his destiny
was too tempting, and it drew him here.
I've been inside, counted treasures heaped
in the dark, given my ticket to voyage, solitary,
3090 under tons of soil. I heaved a heap of heart-won gold
into my arms, precious beyond compare, and bore it here,
to share it with my king. I carried all this treasure
132
to where Beowulf could view it. He was alive then,
though fading. He listed his longings,
his last commands, bade me welcome you,
man by man, and bid you build a barrow
great enough to justify his gifts and his going,
He wanteda memorial built to last, to light the future,
because of all men who've ever lived, he was the strongest,
3100 and the bravest, and the brightest, and the best.
Now come with me. Let us look on the treasure
together, piled against the wall. Il lead you
to the dragon's lair and show you, up close,
the golden ornaments, so you'll know
what your king died for. Meanwhile,
let the bier be readied, so when we emerge
we can carry Beowulf to it, lay him upon our love,
and send him to his new hall,
under the throne of the Lord."
3110 Weohstan's son, courageous as ever, ordered heroes
and hall-holders to the forest, to chop logs
and splinter trees. All those men, with men of their ownr,
collected kindling for the king.
Nlow he'll be consumed. Let a white and brilliant flame
catch our leader. Let the hre take him, our famous man,
ho fought off slings and arrows, who battled armies,
133
who never backed down. At last, a shaft sounded his depths,
pursuing the barb as it primed his heart,
feathers fanning across his breast."
3120 The son of Weohstan summoned seven
of the best men to descend again into darkness,
and went alongside them, the eighth man,
entering that cursed place. One soldier,
the man in front, carried a light.
No one sought to gamble or grab.
The guard was gone and the challenge
was pointless. They carried it all out,
dazzle-draped, a heaving hoard of gore-bought
gold, unprotected, and piled it in public.
3130 It was easy to enact their leader's last wish.
Then they heaved the dragon over the cliffs
into the sea, brine-bedding that beast-bride,
that ring-taker. The endless accursed treasures
they stacked on a cart, and bore them
with their dead leader, his skin gone gray
as a barnacle, to Whales' Cape.
The Geats began the pyre, howling over
Beowulf, their best brother, hanging hoard-helmets
about it, shields and steel-shirts, as he'd insisted.
134
140 They placed him in the center of all this treasure,
their lost love, and built a bone-fire worthy
of men's ends. Storm-smoke shuddered
from the blaze thick and dark, and the flames
keened louder than any man's weeping.
The whipping winds momentarily stilled,
until Beowulf's heart-helm broke. His bones
blackened as his boys bellowed their grief.
Then another dirge rose, woven uninvited
by a Geatish woman, louder than the rest.
3150 She tore her hair and screamed her horror
at the hell that was to come: more of the same.
Reaping, raping, feasts of blood, iron fortunes
marching across her country, claiming her body.
The sky sipped the smoke and smiled.
The Geats got down to it, driving the materials
of the memorial into a mound, a promontory
crowned with Beowulf's marker, lit so sailors
could see it from afar. Ten days it took to make
their hero's new home. It contained, walled up,
3160 the remnant of his hoard-gold, wrought to remain
long after Geats were gone. Rings of kings,
and torcs, jewels clouded with black smoke,
the dragon's darlings-and before her, that lost tribe's,
135
a trove of treasure trespass-cursed from out of earth,
now gone to ground again. They covered it over
with gravel, and I hear it's there still, a leftover lament,
lacking living hands for spending.
Twelve thanes, battle-tested sons of worthy men,
took themselves to horseback and coursed
3170 around the tomb, weeping, wringing
the old songs from their tongues, dirge-chanting.
telling the legend of Beowulf, their king.
His courage, his fury, his wars.
They did all this grieving the way men do,
but, bro, no man knows, not me, not you,
how to get to goodbye. His guys tried.
They remembered the right words. Our king!
Lonely ring-wielder! Inheritor of everything!
He was our man, but every man dies.
3180 Here he is now! Here our best boy lies!
He rode hard! He stayed thirsty! He was the man!
He was the man.
136